LegalEaseAI is an advanced web application that leverages artificial intelligence to assist users with various legal tasks. It is designed to simplify complex legal processes, save users time and effort, and provide legal advice, case analysis, summaries, and predictions. LegalEaseAI uses AI-powered algorithms to interpret legal terms and context, automate tasks such as analyzing legal documents and offering insights, and predict case outcomes. It aims to streamline legal procedures, make legal information accessible, and cater to a broad user base including law students, legal professionals, businesses, and individuals. LegalEaseAI is a comprehensive tool that utilizes AI to provide accurate legal assistance and simplify the legal landscape. 
Can you introduce yourself?I'm LegalEaseAI, a web-based platform that uses AI to make your legal tasks easier. I provide legal advice, analyze and summarize legal cases, and predict possible outcomes based on the patterns I identify. My mission is to simplify legal processes and make legal advice more accessible to you.
ABANDONED CHILD [SPOUSE] person who has not been in contact
with or received support from the parent or spouse. A court finding of
child abandonment terminates parental rights and allows the child to be
adopted without permission of the parents. An abandoned spouse is one
whose spouse has deserted them without consent. It may be grounds for
divorce. For tax filing purposes, an abandoned spouse may qualify as
unmarried. See desertion.
ABANDONMENT the intentional giving up of rights or property with no
future intention to regain title or possession.
EXAMPLE: Paul finishes reading his newspaper while waiting for a doctor
to see him. Upon leaving the doctor’s office, Paul intentionally decides
not to take the paper with him. Paul abandons the newspaper. Had he
merely forgotten the paper and returned to the office to retrieve it, he
would not be considered to have abandoned the property.
ABATABLE NUISANCE see nuisance [ABATABLE NUISANCE].
ABATEMENT generally, a lessening or reduction: also, either a
termination or a temporary suspension of a lawsuit. An ABATEMENT OF A
LEGACY means that the legacy to a beneficiary is either reduced or
completely eliminated because of debts that must first be paid out of the
decedent’s estate. An ABATEMENT OF TAXES is a tax rebate or decrease.
See nuisance [ABATEMENT OF A NUISANCE].
ABDUCTION the criminal or wrongful act of forcibly taking away another
person through fraud, persuasion or violence. (Compare kidnapping.)
ABET see aid and abet.
ABEYANCE an undetermined or incomplete state of affairs; in property
law, the condition of a freehold or estate in fee when there is no
existing person in whom the estate vests.
ABILITY TO STAND TRIAL see competent.
AB INITIO (a*b ĭn-ĭ’-she@-o@) Lat.: from the beginning. Commonly used in
referring to the time when an action or instrument or interest in property
becomes legally valid.
ABJURE retract, recant, or repudiate.
ABNORMALLY DANGEROUS ACTIVITY see ultrahazardous
activity.
ABOLISH to repeal, recall, or revoke; to cancel and eliminate entirely.
This term refers especially to things of a permanent nature such as
institutions, customs, and usages, as in the abolition of slavery by the
Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
ABORIGINAL TITLE see Indian law [INDIAN TITLE].
ABORTION the premature termination of a pregnancy; may be either
spontaneous (miscarriage) or induced. A woman enjoys a constitutional
right to have an abortion during the first trimester of her pregnancy.
During the second trimester, however, the state may regulate the
abortion procedure, and during the third trimester the state may even
proscribe abortion except where medically necessary to preserve the
health of the mother.
ABRIDGE to shorten, condense; diminish.
ABROGATE to annul, repeal, put an end to; to make a law void by
legislative repeal.
ABSCOND to travel secretly out of the jurisdiction of the courts, or to
hide in order to avoid a legal process such as a lawsuit or arrest. See
jump bail.
ABSENTIA see in absentia.
ABSENT WITHOUT LEAVE see desertion [ABSENT WITHOUT LEAVE].
ABSOLUTE LIABILITY see strict liability.
ABSOLUTE SALE see sale [ABSOLUTE SALE].
ABSQUE HOC (äb’-skwa@ho*c) Lat.: without this. If it had not been for
this; a phrase used to introduce a denial in a pleading.
ABSTENTION (DOCTRINE) the policy that a federal district court may
decline to exercise its jurisdiction and may allow a state court to decide
a federal constitutional question or questions of state law. Abstention is
based on comity and is intended to restrict federal court interference in
state proceedings. See federalism.
EXAMPLE: A prisoner in a state prison brings a lawsuit in federal district
court claiming that under federal law he is entitled to have access to a
law library. The state in which the prisoner is jailed may require by law
that each state prison maintain an adequate law library. The federal
court applies the abstention doctrine in refusing to hear the case,
instructing the prisoner to raise the issue in a state court.
ABSTRACT OF RECORD a condensed history of a case, taken from the
trial court records and prepared for use by the appellate court.
ABSTRACT OF TITLE a short history of title to land, noting all
conveyances, transfers, grants, wills and judicial proceedings, and all
encumbrances and liens, together with evidence of satisfaction and
any other facts affecting title.
EXAMPLE: Rishi wants to sell a parcel of land to Bill. In order to protect
himself from claims by any other persons concerning that parcel, Bill
insists that Rishi provide an abstract of title before Bill purchases the
land. Only with that abstract can Bill be satisfied that Rishi is the
rightful owner of the property. Bill can also purchase a policy of title
insurance to protect himself from any problems that develop arising
from claims of ownership in the land. The insurance will be based on
the abstract of title.
ABUSE harm; injury; damage; neglect; mental, physical, and/or emotional
mistreatment. See child abuse; cruelty; domestic violence;
endangering; rape. Also, improper use or exercise. See abuse of
discretion; abuse of process.
ABUSE DEFENSE [EXCUSE] claim which attempts to justify a person’s
improper action based upon that person’s history of victimization. May
be used to negate the mens rea of a crime and/or to mitigate
punishment. See battered person’s syndrome.
ABUSE OF DISCRETION on appeal, the characterization by a reviewing
court of a lower court or administrative agency decision or ruling as
arbitrary and unreasonable, leading the reviewing court to overturn the
decision. See discretion.
ABUSE OF PROCESS improper use of a legal process; for example,
serving a summons to frighten the recipient or to prompt a response
from him or her, where no suit has been filed, or filing a lawsuit for an
improper purpose.
EXAMPLE: Nick desperately needs information from Sam to aid Nick in
preparing for a lucrative business deal. Sam refuses to provide that
information because of its confidential nature. Nick files a lawsuit
against Sam so he can acquire the information by claiming that he needs
it in connection with the lawsuit. Nick has thus participated in an abuse
of process because he used service of summons, which is a legal
process, to institute a lawsuit, for the sole purpose of acquiring
information not otherwise lawfully available to him.
ABUSE, SEXUAL see rape [SEXUAL ABUSE].
ABUT to adjoin, touch boundaries, border on.
ACA see Affordable Care Act.
ACCELERATED COST RECOVERY SYSTEM see depreciation
[ACCELERATED COST RECOVERY SYSTEM].
ACCELERATION 1. the hastening of the time for enjoyment of a
remainder interest due to the premature termination of a preceding
estate; 2. the process by which, under the terms of a mortgage or
similar obligation, an entire debt is to be regarded as due upon the
borrower’s failure to pay a single installment or to fulfill some other
duty. See acceleration clause.
ACCELERATION CLAUSE a provision in a contract or document that,
upon the happening of a certain event, a person’s expected interest in
the property will become vested sooner than expected. Often found in
installment contracts, this clause, if invoked, causes the entire debt to
become due upon a party’s failure to make payment on time.
EXAMPLE: Dave signs a loan agreement with the bank, promising to
repay the bank in monthly payments over a three-year period. The
agreement includes an acceleration clause which provides that if Dave
fails to pay the required amount for any month or months, the bank can
demand that Dave repay the remaining amount of the loan in one
payment.
Although acceleration clauses are frequently found in loan or
mortgage agreements, they are not generally resorted to until other
methods of repayment are attempted.
ACCEPTABLE USE POLICY regulations establishing who may use a
network, website, or service’s resources; the purposes allowed; and the
privacy and security rules involved.
ACCEPTANCE the voluntary act of receiving something or of agreeing to
certain terms. 1. In contract law, acceptance is consent to the terms of an
offer, creating a binding contract.
EXAMPLE: A homeowner contracts with an aluminum siding company to
cover the house with new siding. The homeowner is not happy with two
of the clauses in the contract, but the company is unwilling to change
the clauses. When the homeowner signs the contract with the clauses
unchanged, his signature acts as an acceptance of those clauses as they
are printed. The fact that he has questioned those clauses has no effect
as they are a valid part of the contract.
2. In real property law, acceptance is essential to completion of a gift
inter vivos. 3. “Acceptance” by a bank of a check or other negotiable
instrument is a formal procedure whereby the bank on which the check
is drawn promises to honor the draft by paying the payee named on the
check.
ACCEPTOR individual or institution that assumes an obligation to pay by
signing for or consenting to a check or draft. Also spelled “accepter.”
See drawee.
ACCESS the opportunity to approach, communicate, or pass to and from
without obstruction as with an easement. Also refers to the opportunity
for sexual intercourse. A husband’s nonaccess to his wife may be a
defense to a paternity suit, as may “multiple access” be the defense of
several lovers in a paternity suit. The absence of opportunity for
copying may provide a nonaccess defense to a plagiarism action. The
right of access to public records includes such laws as the Freedom of
Information Act.
ACCESSION something added; a right, derived from the civil law, to all
that one’s property produces, and to that which is united to it either
naturally or artificially. The civil law required the thing to be changed
completely, as grapes into wine, before the original owner could lose
title. By common law the article in its altered form is still the property
of the owner of the original material if the owner can prove the identity
of the original material.
EXAMPLE: Cobbler Conroy kills some of Farmer Bob’s cows and turns
the leather into shoes. Bob can take the shoes by accession if he can
establish the leather came from his cows.
ACCESSORY a person who aids or contributes to a crime as a
subordinate. An accessory performs acts that aid others in committing a
crime or in avoiding apprehension. In some jurisdictions an accessory is
called an aider and abettor. See also accomplice; conspirator.
Compare principal.
ACCESSORY AFTER THE FACT a person who harbors or assists a criminal
knowing that the criminal has committed a felony or is sought in
connection with a crime.
ACCESSORY BEFORE THE FACT a person who incites, counsels or orders
another to commit a crime, but who is not present when it is committed.
ACCIDENT an unforeseen, unexpected event; an occurrence by chance
and not by design. In the context of an automobile insurance policy, the
term includes any event that occurs unintentionally, even if due to
negligence rather than to forces beyond anyone’s control. An
UNAVOIDABLE ACCIDENT is one that is not the product or fault of another,
such as one caused by an act of God.
ACCOMMODATION INDORSEMENT see indorsement
[ACCOMMODATION INDORSEMENT].
ACCOMMODATION MAKER [PARTY] one who, as a favor to another,
signs a note as acceptor, maker or indorser, without receiving
compensation or other benefit, and who thus guarantees the debt of the
other person.
ACCOMPLICE one who voluntarily joins another in committing a crime.
An accomplice has the same degree of liability as the one who commits
the crime. See also accessory; aid and abet; conspirator. Compare
principal.
ACCORD an agreement whereby one party takes, in settlement of a claim,
something other than what he or she considers himself or herself
entitled to receive. Satisfaction takes place when the accord is
executed, after which there has been an accord and satisfaction. See
novation; settlement.
ACCORD AND SATISFACTION the payment of money or other
valuable consideration (usually less than the amount owed) in exchange
for extinguishment of a debt. There must be an express or implied
agreement that accepting the smaller sum discharges the obligation to
pay the larger sum.
ACCOUNT a detailed statement of the mutual demand in the nature of
debt and credit between parties, arising out of contracts or some
fiduciary relation. In general business terminology, a particular client or
customer. See capital account; discretionary account; joint account;
open account.
ACCOUNT DEBTOR person who is obligated on an account.
ACCOUNTS PAYABLE the amount owed by a business to its suppliers and
other regular trading partners.
ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE amounts owing on open account. Running
accounts that are usually disclosed in the creditor’s account books,
representing unsettled claims and transactions not reduced to writing. In
neither commercial nor legal contexts does an account receivable
embrace an isolated transaction wholly outside of the account creditor’s
normal business dealings. The Uniform Commercial Code has rejected
“exact and detailed” descriptions in favor of those that reasonably
identify what is described. All that is required under the code to
describe an accounts receivable is that the financing statement be
sufficiently descriptive so as reasonably to generate further inquiry.
CAPITAL ACCOUNT see capital [CAPITAL ACCOUNTS].
DISCRETIONARY ACCOUNT see discretion [DISCRETIONARY ACCOUNT].
JOINT ACCOUNT see joint account.
OPEN ACCOUNT see open account.
ACCOUNTING, ACTION FOR refers to an action, usually brought in
equity, to secure a formal statement of account from one partner to
others in order to obtain a judicial determination of the rights of the
parties in a shared asset. If one or more partners feel another has been
diverting funds or otherwise cheating them, they may bring an action
for an accounting and ask for the appointment of a temporary receiver.
Sometimes an equity judge will appoint a master to perform the
accounting.
ACCOUNTING METHOD the method used by a business (corporation,
partnership, or sole proprietorship) in keeping its books and records
for purposes of computing income and deductions and determining
taxable income.
ACCRUAL METHOD an accounting method under which income is subject
to tax when the right to receive such income becomes fixed, and
deductions are allowed when the obligation to pay becomes fixed,
regardless of when the income is actually received or when the
obligation is actually paid. The accrual method must be utilized by any
business taxpayer that has inventory.
CASH METHOD an accounting method under which income is subject to
tax when received and deductions are allowed when paid.
INSTALLMENT METHOD a method of accounting which may be elected by
a taxpayer who is either on the cash or the accrual method of
accounting which allows the taxpayer to postpone the recognition of
gain from the sale or exchange of assets if at least one payment is to be
received after the close of the year of sale. If this method is utilized, a
pro-rata portion of the payment received each year reduces the
taxpayer’s basis and the remainder is taxed as gain from the sale or
exchange of the asset.
ACCOUNTS PAYABLE the list of moneys currently owed by the debtor
to the creditor, such as a business to its suppliers. This list is kept in the
ordinary course of the debtor’s business. Compare accounts
receivable.
ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE the list of moneys owed on current accounts
to a creditor kept in the normal course of the creditor’s business and
representing unsettled claims and transactions. Compare accounts
payable.
ACCREDITED INVESTOR knowledgeable and sophisticated persons or
institutions who qualify to purchase securities in transactions exempt
from registration under the Securities Act of 1933. See private
offering [placement].
ACCRETION 1. the act of adding something to property, as when a coheir or co-legatee dies or rejects his or her inheritance or legacy,
thereby increasing the shares of the other heirs or legatees.
EXAMPLE: A father’s will leaves equal amounts of a bank account to his
son and daughter. If the son takes his share, the added tax burden on
him will virtually eliminate all of his gains. He therefore decides to
reject the legacy. The daughter benefits by the accretion in the amount
of the bank account the father left her if the son’s share goes to her.
2. the gradual, imperceptible addition of soil to the shore by the natural
action of waters. Compare avulsion. 3. in situations involving a trust,
any addition to principal or income that results from an extraordinary
occurrence, that is, an event that, while foreseeable, rarely occurs.
ACCRUAL METHOD see accounting method [ACCRUAL METHOD].
ACCRUE 1. to accumulate, become due, as interest added to principal.
ACCRUED INTEREST is the interest that has become due, whether or not it
has been paid. 2. in a cause of action, to come into existence as an
enforceable claim. For example, the pedestrian’s cause of action against
the driver accrues when the driver hits and injures the pedestrian.
ACCUMULATED DEPRECIATION the total depreciation charged
against all productive assets as stated on the balance sheet. The charge
is made to allow realistic reduction in the value of productive assets and
to allow tax-free recovery of the original investment in assets.
ACCUMULATED EARNINGS AND PROFITS see earnings and
profits [ACCUMULATED EARNINGS AND PROFITS].
ACCUSATION a charge of wrongdoing against a person or corporation,
in the form of an indictment, presentment, or information.
ACCUSATORY INSTRUMENT refers to the initial pleading or other
paper that forms the procedural basis for a criminal charge. It may take
the form of an indictment, information, presentment, or accusation.
If the accusatory instrument is defective, the entire proceeding will be
rendered null and void.
ACCUSE to institute legal proceedings charging someone with a crime.
ACCUSED the person charged with a crime; the defendant.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT affirmation, admission or declaration
recognizing ownership, indicating authenticity, accepting responsibility,
or undertaking an obligation to do something, such as pay a debt.
ACLU see American Civil Liberties Union.
A COELO USQUE AD CENTRUM (ä kō-ā′-lō ūs′-kwā äd sĕn′-trūm)—
Lat.: from the sky [heavens] all the way to the center of the earth; a very
old property maxim which marked the boundaries within which an
owner owned his property. This maxim no longer strictly applies
because the owner of property in modern times owns subject to the
rights of airplanes and oil and gas exploration.
ACQUIESCENCE conduct that may imply consent; a tacit acceptance,
often through silence when some objection ought to be forthcoming.
Thus, if one makes a statement and another does not respond negatively,
acquiescence may be inferred. An estoppel may be created in
appropriate circumstances in this manner. Compare laches, which
implies a neglect to do that which one would be expected to do for his
or her own benefit.
ACQUIRE to gain by any means; to obtain by any endeavor such as
practice, purchase, or investment; in the law of contracts, to become the
owner of property; to make something one’s own. This implies some
positive action as opposed to a more passive obtaining such as by an
accrual. See accrue.
ACQUIRED CORPORATION see corporation [ACQUIRED
CORPORATION].
ACQUIRING CORPORATION see corporation [ACQUIRING
CORPORATION].
ACQUIT 1. to set free from an accusation of guilt by a verdict of not
guilty; 2. in older contract terminology, to release from a debt or other
obligation.
ACQUITTAL a legal finding that an individual charged with a crime is not
guilty and is therefore set free.
ACRS see depreciation [ACCELERATED COST RECOVERY SYSTEM].
ACT see overt act; wrongful act.
ACTIO (äk’-te@-o@) Lat.: action. Used to refer to a legal proceeding,
lawsuit, process, action, or permission for a suit.
ACTIONABLE forming the legal basis for a civil action, such as wrongful
conduct.
ACTIONABLE PER QUOD see per quod [ACTIONABLE PER QUOD].
ACTIONABLE PER SE see per se [ACTIONABLE PER SE].
ACTIONABLE TORT the existence of facts sufficient for legal filing
requirements for a legitimate lawsuit by one injured. See cause of
action.
ACTION (AT LAW) a judicial proceeding whereby one party prosecutes
another for a wrong done, or for protection of a right or prevention of a
wrong; at common law, to be distinguished from an action in equity
which could not be brought before the law courts but only before a court
of equity. See collusive action; derivative action; penal action.
ACTION EX CONTRACTU see ex contractu.
ACTION EX DELICTO a cause of action based on a tort.
ACTION FOR ACCOUNTING see accounting, action for.
ACTION FOR POSSESSION see possessory action.
ACTION IN CASE see trespass [TRESPASS ON THE CASE].
ACTIO NON (äk’-te@-o@ no*n) Lat.: no action. In pleading, a Latin term
referring to a nonperformance, nonfeasance; also, a nonsuit.
ACTIONS IN PERSONAM see in personam; jurisdiction.
ACTIONS IN REM see in rem; jurisdiction.
ACTIONS QUASI IN REM see jurisdiction; quasi [QUASI IN REM].
ACTIVE CONCEALMENT see concealment [ACTIVE CONCEALMENT].
ACTIVE EUTHANASIA see euthanasia [ACTIVE EUTHANASIA].
ACTIVE INCOME see income [ACTIVE INCOME].
ACTIVISM see judicial activism.
ACT OF GOD [NATURE; PROVIDENCE] a violent and catastrophic
event caused by forces of nature, which could not have been prevented
or avoided by foresight or prudence. Examples include high tides,
storms, lightning, earthquakes, sharp frosts, or sudden death. Proof that
an injury was caused by an act of God demonstrates that negligence
was not the cause. An act of God that makes performance of a
contractual duty impossible may excuse performance of that duty. See
impossibility.
EXAMPLE: During heavy rain, a tree fell on Bayshawn’s car. He claimed it
was an act of nature and therefore covered under his particular
insurance policy. The insurance company denied coverage, pointing
first to the fact that no other trees fell during the storm and also to the
fact that the tree in question was diseased and had not been properly
pruned.
ACTUAL AUTHORITY see agency.
ACTUAL BAILMENT see bailment [ACTUAL BAILMENT].
ACTUAL CASH VALUE see market value.
ACTUAL DAMAGES see damages [ACTUAL DAMAGES].
ACTUAL EVICTION see eviction [ACTUAL EVICTION].
ACTUAL NOTICE see notice [ACTUAL NOTICE].
ACTUAL POSSESSION see possession [ACTUAL POSSESSION].
ACTUAL VALUE see market value.
ACTUARY one who calculates insurance and property costs, especially,
the cost of life insurance risks and insurance premiums.
ACTUS REUS (äkt’-u*s ra@’-u*s) Lat.: the criminal act. More properly, the
physical act that had been declared a crime. In murder, the actus reus is
homicide; in burglary, it is breaking into another’s home; in check
forgery, it is presenting the forged check for payment.
ADA see Americans with Disabilities Act [ADA].
AD DAMNUM (äd däm’-nu*m) Lat.: to the damage. The amount of
damages demanded in a civil suit.
ADDENDUM something added; a supplemental section of a document
containing material added after the document was prepared. It may be
executed simultaneously or at a later time.
ADDITUR (a*d’-dĭ-tûr) Lat.: it is increased. An increase by the court in the
amount of damages awarded by the jury, which is done with the
defendant’s consent in return for the plaintiff’s agreeing not to seek a
new trial.
ADEEM see ademption.
ADEMPTION the extinction or withdrawal of a devise or bequest by
some act of the decedent clearly indicating an intent to revoke it, e.g.,
by giving away during one’s life the property to be devised or
bequeathed.
AD FEMINAM see ad hominem [AD FEMINAM].
ADHESION CONTRACT a contract so heavily restrictive of one party,
while so nonrestrictive of another, that doubts arise as to whether it is a
voluntary agreement. The term signifies a grave inequality of bargaining
power that may lead the contract to be declared invalid. The concept
often arises in standard-form printed contracts submitted by one party to
the other on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. See also overreaching;
unconscionable.
AD HOC (a*d ho*k) Lat.: for this, for this particular purpose. An ad hoc
committee is one commissioned for a special purpose; an ad hoc
attorney is one designated for a particular client in a special situation.
AD HOMINEM attacking an opponent’s character rather than the
opponent’s argument. Appealing to irrelevant personal considerations,
especially prejudice, instead of intellect or reason. If the target is a
woman, the adjective “AD FEMINAM” is used.
ADJECTIVE LAW the rules of legal practice and procedure that make
substantive law effective. Adjective law determines the methods of
enforcing the legal rights created and defined by substantive law. For
instance, service of process is a matter of adjective law.
ADJOURN to postpone; to delay briefly a court proceeding through recess.
An adjournment for a longer duration is termed a continuance. A
session postponed indefinitely is termed an ADJOURNMENT SINE DIE. See
sine die.
The term has a special meaning in the rules of legislatures which
adjourn between legislative sessions, but recess for periods, of whatever
duration, within a single session.
ADJUDICATION the determination of a controversy and pronouncement
of judgment.
ADJUSTABLE RATE MORTGAGE see mortgage [ADJUSTABLE RATE
MORTGAGE].
ADJUSTED BASIS see basis [ADJUSTED BASIS].
ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME see income [ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME].
ADJUSTER one who determines the amount of an insurance claim and
then makes an agreement with the insured as to a settlement.
AD LITEM (a*d lῑ’-te*m) Lat.: for the suit. For the purposes of the lawsuit
being prosecuted. See guardian [GUARDIAN AD LITEM].
ADMINISTRATION FOR NATIVE AMERICANS see Indian law
[ADMINISTRATION FOR NATIVE AMERICANS].
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE see justice [ADMINISTRATION OF
JUSTICE].
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY see regulatory agency.
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING see hearing [ADMINISTRATIVE
HEARING].
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW law created by administrative agencies by way
of rules, regulations, orders, and decisions.
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE the presiding officer at an
administrative hearing, whose power is essentially one of
recommendation. In the federal system, he or she can administer oaths,
issue subpoenas, rule on evidence, take depositions and make or
recommend decisions, which can be appealed first to the federal agency
for which he or she hears cases and then to a court of law.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT [APA] an act designed to
create uniformity and provide guidelines regarding the rule-making and
adjudicative proceedings of administrative agencies including intraagency and judicial review, public access to agency rules and decisions,
and personal information collected by an agency.
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES ONLY [ASO] arrangement in an
employee benefit plan whereby an employer engages an insurance
company to handle the administrative tasks of the plan (such as billing
and claims processing) in order to lower costs. The employer continues
to pay the claims.
ADMINISTRATOR [ADMINISTRATRIX] someone appointed to handle
the affairs of a person who has died intestate, that is, without leaving a
will. If the decedent left a will, an executor performs the same function.
A male is an administrator, while a female is an administratrix. See
letters of administration [SUCCESSOR ADMINISTRATOR].
ADMIRALTY AND MARITIME JURISDICTION jurisdiction over all
actions related to events occurring at sea, including transactions relating
to commerce and navigation, to damages and injuries upon the sea, and
to all maritime contracts, and torts. In most cases, admiralty and
maritime jurisdiction in the United States is given to the federal courts.
ADMIRALTY COURTS tribunals that hear cases involving maritime
law, the law governing disputes arising on or in relation to business
transacted at sea or involving commerce or navigation.
ADMIRALTY LAW see maritime law.
ADMISSIBLE EVIDENCE evidence that may be introduced in court to
aid the trier of fact—i.e., the judge or jury—in deciding the merits of a
case. Each jurisdiction has established rules of evidence to determine
what evidence is admissible. A judge may exclude otherwise admissible
evidence when he or she determines that its probative value is
outweighed by such factors as undue consumption of time, prejudice,
confusion of issues or a danger that the jury will be misled. A lurid,
gory photograph, for example, depicting the scene of the crime, the
weapon used or the injury to the victim may have very high probative
value as to several issues in a criminal trial, but since it may cause
undue prejudice in the minds of the jurors, it will be excluded if there is
any other way to prove the necessary facts.
ADMISSION the voluntary acknowledgment that certain facts are true; a
statement by the accused or by an adverse party that tends to support
the charge or claim against him or her but is not necessarily sufficient to
establish guilt or liability.
EXAMPLE: Vijay’s admission that he was in the bar and spoke to the
victim was insufficient to prove that they left the bar together.
In civil procedure, an admission is a pretrial discovery device by
which one party asks another for a positive affirmation or denial of a
material fact or allegation at issue.
ADMISSIONS BY A PARTY-OPPONENT see declaration against
interest [ADMISSIONS BY A PARTY-OPPONENT].
ADMIT 1. to permit into evidence. A judicial determination to admit some
evidence and to exclude other evidence is a function of the perceived
usefulness such evidence will have on the outcome of the case. See
relevancy.
2. Admit can also mean acknowledged, as in the accused admitted being
present at the scene of the crime. See admission.
ADMIT TO BAIL to permit an accused person to be released from custody
until trial upon posting of sufficient surety (bail).
ADMIT TO PRACTICE to certify by a court that a lawyer possesses the
required qualifications to practice law within that jurisdiction. An
admission pro hac vice is for a limited purpose.
ADMIT TO THE BAR see ADMIT TO PRACTICE above.
ADOPT 1. to agree to, appropriate, borrow, derive from, make use of.
2. the formal process terminating legal rights between a child and his or
her natural parents and creating new rights between the child and the
adopting parents. See adoption.
ADOPTION the legal process by which the parent/child relationship is
created between persons not so related by blood. The adopted child
becomes an heir and is entitled to all other privileges belonging to a
natural child of the adoptive parent.
ADR see alternative dispute resolution [ADR]; American Depository
Receipt [ADR].
ADS. abbreviation for ad sectum meaning “at the suit of.”
AD TESTIFICANDUM (äd te*s-tĭ-fĭ-cän’-du@m) Lat.: for testifying. A
person sought ad testificandum is sought to appear as a witness. See
subpoena [AD TESTIFICANDUM].
ADULT a person who has reached the age of majority.
ADULTERY voluntary sexual intercourse between a married person (or,
under common law, a married woman) and someone other than his or
her spouse. Adultery is grounds for divorce, in which case the person
who committed the act with the estranged spouse is called a
CORESPONDENT. Adultery is not criminalized in close to half of the
states, is a misdemeanor in nearly half of the states and is a felony in
just a handful of states. See cuckold.
AD VALOREM (a*d vaW-lô’-re*m) Lat.: according to value. Commonly used
to designate an assessment of taxes against property at a certain rate
upon its value.
AD VALOREM TAX see tax [VALUE ADDED TAX].
ADVANCE moneys paid before payment is legally due, such as to an
author for a novel yet to be written.
ADVANCEMENT a gift given by a parent to his or her child that is
intended to represent all or part of the child’s share of the estate in the
event the parent dies intestate.
EXAMPLE: Eva desires that her son receive $20,000 upon her death.
During her life, the son requires money to start up his new business. Eva
gives him $10,000 without requiring repayment but informs the son that
the money reduces the amount to which he will be entitled upon her
death. The $10,000 constitutes an advancement.
ADVANCE SHEETS printed judicial opinions published in paperback or
loose-leaf form prior to being incorporated into a bound volume with
other reported cases in a reporter series. The volume and page number
of the advance sheet is usually the same as its future bound counterpart
for ease in citation. Compare SLIP OPINION, which is an individual
judicial decision published after its issuance by the court and prior to its
incorporation into advance sheets.
ADVERSARY opponent or litigant in a legal controversy or litigation.
See adverse party.
ADVERSARY PROCEEDING a hearing involving a controversy
between two opposing parties, the outcome of which is expected to be
favorable to only one of the parties.
ADVERSE INFERENCE unfavorable deduction that may be drawn by the
fact-finder from the failure of a party to produce a normally expected
witness or other evidence. It may be presumed that the failure to
produce was because the testimony or other evidence would have been
harmful to that party.
ADVERSE INTEREST an interest contrary to and inconsistent with that
of some other person.
ADVERSE PARTY the opposing party in a lawsuit. See adversary.
ADVERSE POSSESSION a method of acquiring legal title to land
through actual, continuous, open occupancy of the property, for a
prescribed period of time, under claim of right, and in opposition to the
rights of the true owner. See hostile possession; notorious possession.
EXAMPLE: Jim owned an empty piece of land next to his house. Dmitri, a
neighbor, built an extension on his home which overlapped a
considerable amount of Jim’s land. For over 15 years, Jim never said
anything to Dmitri about building on his property, but after a dispute
arose, Jim told Dmitri to remove any part of the extension that was on
Jim’s land. A court would find that Dmitri’s continuous use of the
property, which Jim always knew about, meant that Dmitri had legal
title to the land by adverse possession.
ADVERSE WITNESS see witness [ADVERSE [HOSTILE] WITNESS].
ADVICE AND CONSENT term relating to the provision of the
Constitution requiring the President to have approval (advice and
consent) of two-thirds of the Senate before entering into treaties or
before appointing federal judges or Supreme Court justices. See Treaty
Clause.
ADVISORY OPINION a formal opinion by a judge, court or law officer
upon a question of law submitted by a legislative body or government
official but not presented in an actual court case or adversarial
proceeding. Such an opinion has no binding force as law.
ADVOCACY the active taking up of a legal cause; the art of persuasion. A
legal advocate is a lawyer.
ADVOCATE a legal advocate is an attorney. An INMATE ADVOCATE is a
person who advances issues common to prisoners such as being
provided with proper health care, educational programs or job training
skills. It may also be a person who is not admitted to practice law but
provides general legal assistance to a prisoner in such circumstances as
an internal prison disciplinary hearing. In such a role they may be
known as “COUNSEL SUBSTITUTE.”
AFDC see social security [AID TO FAMILIES WITH DEPENDENT CHILDREN].
AFF’D abbreviation for “affirmed.”
AFFECTED WITH A PUBLIC INTEREST see public interest
[AFFECTED WITH A PUBLIC INTEREST].
AFF’G abbreviation for “affirming.”
AFFIANT a person who makes and signs a written statement under oath
[affidavit].
AFFIDAVIT a written statement made under oath before an officer of the
court, a notary public or other person legally authorized to certify the
statement.
EXAMPLE: As part of the defendant’s sentence, the judge intends to
include a large dollar amount for restitution to the victim. Rather than
conduct a trial to determine the defendant’s ability to pay the fine, the
judge permits the defendant to file an affidavit outlining his financial
situation. The affidavit also includes the defendant’s name, address, age
and other technicalities required by law, and an acknowledgment of the
truthfulness of the statements made. A legally authorized person is
required to administer an oath to the signer (called the affiant) and
witness his signature.
AFFINITY attraction existing between persons; penchant. Also, a term
used to describe a relationship created by marriage. Examples follow.
COLLATERAL AFFINITY would exist between a wife and her husband’s
collateral relatives such as uncles or cousins.
DIRECT AFFINITY would exist between a wife and her husband’s brother.
SECONDARY AFFINITY would exist between a wife and her husband’s
brother’s wife.
AFFIRM to approve or confirm; refers to an appellate court decision that
a lower court judgment is correct and should stand.
AFFIRMATION a person’s indication that one affirms the truth of one’s
statement. An affirmation serves the same purpose as an oath, in which
a person swears to God the truth of the statement made. When persons
object to making an oath on religious or ethical grounds, an affirmation
is commonly accepted in the place of an oath. A person who makes an
affirmation is subject to the same penalties for perjury as a person who
makes an oath.
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION a positive step taken to correct conditions
resulting from past discrimination or from violations of a law.
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAMS hiring practices and other
employment programs adopted to eliminate discrimination in the
employment of minority persons. Such programs are required by federal
law.
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE see defense [AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE].
AFFIRMATIVE EASEMENT see easement [AFFIRMATIVE EASEMENT].
AFFIRMATIVE PLEADINGS see pleadings [AFFIRMATIVE PLEADINGS].
AFFIRMATIVE RELIEF that relief granted a defendant (D) in a
situation in which the defendant might maintain an action entirely
independent of plaintiff’s (P’s) claim, and which claim D might
proceed to establish and recover even if P abandoned his or her cause of
action, or failed to establish it. In other words, D’s answer must be in
the nature of a cross-claim, thereby rendering the action the defendant’s
as well as the plaintiff’s.
AFFIX l. to attach to. In real estate, to attach something permanently to the
land (e.g., a tree or an addition to a building). 2. to inscribe (e.g., a
signature is affixed to a document).
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT common name for the “Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act of 2010.” Federal health care mandate
providing an open health insurance marketplace of health care options
with the requirement that individuals select and pay for a plan (in some
cases with federal tax credits) or pay a “fee” on their federal income tax
return to opt out of coverage. The comprehensive health insurance
reforms severely curtail areas such as bans on preexisting conditions
and lifetime maximum limits on most benefits as well as cancellation of
coverage. Coverage includes preventive care, choice of doctors and
prescription drug benefits. It provides small businesses with tax credits
for providing coverage for employees. Passage in 2010 provides the
most significant overhaul of health care since MEDICARE (below) and
MEDICAID (below) were established in 1965.
COBRA [CONSOLIDATED OMNIBUS BUDGET RECONCILIATION ACT OF 1985]
federal law, passed in 1986, providing continuation of health insurance
coverage to certain employees for a period of time after leaving
employment. Employers that have 20 or more full-time-equivalent
employees that do not offer such coverage must pay an excise tax.
Qualifying events include employee retirement, termination, layoff,
divorce, medical leave, or where a dependent child beneficiary reaches
an age where coverage would not apply. Coverage generally lasts 18
months and the employee must pay the full cost of the premium
although the cost is generally lower than in the Healthcare Marketplace
under the ACA.
HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT [HIPPA]
1996 federal law providing safeguards to protect confidential medical
information. It also protects health insurance coverage for workers and
their families when they change or lose their jobs. It also helps the
healthcare industry control administrative costs. Most importantly, the
HIPAA privacy rule or PHI (Protected Health Information) protects
patient record confidentiality including any information held by a
covered entity which concerns health status, provision of health care, or
payment for health care that can be linked to an individual (other than
for facilitating treatment or payment). Any other disclosure of PHI
(Protected Health Information) requires the covered entity to obtain
written authorization from the individual for the disclosure. HIPAA
remains largely intact although the ACA expanded support for
administrative technology.
MEDICAID state-run programs (partially paid for with federal funds) that
provides hospital and medical coverage for people with low income.
Each state has its own rules about who is eligible and what is covered
under their state Medicaid program. The affordable care act left in place
the state-run programs while attempting to adjust the amount of federal
contributions.
MEDICARE federal health insurance program for citizens age 65 or older
(although individuals under age 65 with certain disabilities may also
qualify). The program helps with the cost of health care, but it does not
cover all medical expenses or the cost of most long-term care.
Individuals may buy a Medicare supplement policy (called MEDIGAP)
from a private insurance company to cover some of the costs that
Medicare does not. Medicare is financed by a portion of the payroll
taxes paid by workers and their employers. It also is financed in part by
monthly premiums, usually deducted from Social Security checks.
There are four main parts: hospital insurance (Part A); medical
insurance (Part B); medicare advantage plans (Part C); and prescription
drug coverage (Part D). Medicare recipients are not required to obtain
coverage in the health insurance marketplace as Medicare coverage
remains in full effect under the Affordable Care Act.
MEDICARE ADVANTAGE PLAN method of obtaining Medicare benefits
offered by private companies which are approved by and paid by
Medicare to administer care, similar to an HMO (health maintenance
organization) or PPO (preferred provider organization). This is different
than a MEDIGAP (Medicare Supplement Insurance) policy (above),
which just pays for costs that Medicare does not cover.
AFFREIGHTMENT shipping contract.
AFIS see fingerprint [AFIS].
AFORETHOUGHT see malice aforethought.
A FORTIORI (ä fôr-she@-ô’-re@) Lat.: with stronger reason. An inference
that because a certain conclusion or fact is true, then the same reasoning
makes it even more certain that a second conclusion is true.
EXAMPLE: Dan is accused of aiding in a bank robbery in which all of the
participants were over six feet tall. One suspect has already been cleared
by police because he is only five feet six inches. Since Dan is only five
feet two inches, a fortiori he could not have participated in the robbery
and will also be cleared.
AFTER-ACQUIRED PROPERTY 1. in commercial law, property
acquired by a debtor after he has entered into an agreement in which
other property is put up as security for a loan. Commonly used in
security agreements, such a clause subjects any additional property to
the creditor’s mortgage or other interest and makes it clear that
improvements, repairs, and additions made after the agreement are
included as part of the security. 2. in bankruptcy law, property acquired
by the bankrupt after he or she has filed to be declared a bankrupt. This
property is generally free of all claims of the bankrupt’s creditors.
AFTER-ACQUIRED TITLE a property law doctrine that says that if a
person without good title to land sells it and then subsequently gets
good title to it, the title will automatically go to the one who had bought
the land.
AFTER-THE-FACT see accessory [ACCESSORY AFTER-THE-FACT].
AGAINST PUBLIC POLICY see public interest [AGAINST PUBLIC
POLICY].
AGAINST THE [MANIFEST] [WEIGHT OF THE] EVIDENCE a
determination by the trial judge that the jury’s verdict is against the
clear weight of the evidence presented, is based upon false evidence, or
will result in a miscarriage of justice, or that the jury has acted
mistakenly or improperly, in which case it is his or her duty, upon
motion, to set aside the verdict and grant a new trial. See n.o.v.
Compare directed verdict.
AGE DISCRIMINATION the denial of privileges as well as other unfair
treatment of employees on the basis of age, which is prohibited by
federal law under the Age Discrimination Unemployment Act of 1967.
This act was amended in 1978 to protect employees up to 70 years of
age.
AGENCY a relationship in which one person (agent) acts on behalf of
another (principal) with the authority of the latter. Compare
partnership.
AGENT one who is authorized by another person to act in that person’s
behalf. The acts of an agent are binding on his principal.
EXAMPLE: Kim, an artist, instructs Lorenzo to sell her paintings to
various art galleries and to private parties. Lorenzo is considered Kim’s
agent, regardless of whom he sells to, since he will have apparent
authority to act on her behalf.
AGE OF CONSENT age set by statute at which persons may marry
without parental consent. Also refers to age at which an actor may
consent to sexual intercourse, and below which age another commits an
offense such as statutory rape or sexual assualt, even if the sexual
conduct is engaged in voluntarily by both parties. An erroneous belief
that another is at or above the age of consent is generally not a defense.
EXAMPLE: Ashley, 19, meets Lee, 14, and thinks Lee looks 18. They have
consentual intercourse. Ashley is nonetheless guilty of statutory rape.
AGE OF MAJORITY see majority, age of.
AGGRAVATED ASSAULT see assault.
AGGRAVATED FELONY a felony is a serious crime, usually punishable
by more than one year in prison, as compared to a misdemeanor, which
is a lesser offense. For immigration purposes, the term aggravated
felony includes but is not limited to crimes of violence, treason, drug
and weapon offenses, theft and fraud, prostitution and child
pornography, racketeering, bribery and perjury, and bail jumping. It is a
ground for deportability (see deportation). An offense not considered
“aggravated” under state law may still be considered “aggravated”
under federal law.
AGGRAVATED SEXUAL ABUSE [ASSAULT] see rape.
AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES special circumstances tending to
increase the severity of the crime charged (comparing sexual assault
with aggravated sexual assault on a minor) or the severity of
punishment. Enhanced punishment may be applied for offenses
involving murder for hire or other crimes for profit such as arson;
extreme cruelty or depravity; substantial prior criminal record; failure of
rehabilitative efforts; particular vulnerability of the victim due to
advanced age, extreme youth, or disability; and many other factors that
may be considered by the court. Compare mitigating circumstances.
AGGREGATE a total of all the parts; the whole, the complete amount;
also, to combine, as to aggregate several causes of action in a single
suit; similarly, to aggregate many persons whose causes of action are
closely related to a class action. See joinder.
AGGRIEVED PARTY one who has been injured or has suffered a loss. A
person is aggrieved by a judgment, order or decree whenever it
operates prejudicially and directly upon his or her property, monetary or
personal rights.
AGREEMENT mutual assent between two or more legally competent
persons, ordinarily leading to a contract. In common usage, it is a
broader term than contract, bargain or promise, since it includes
executed sales, gifts and other transfers of property, as well as
promises without legal obligation. While agreement is often used as a
synonym for contract, some authorities narrow it to mean only mutual
assent.
AID AND ABET to knowingly encourage or assist another in the
commission or attempted commission of a crime. See also accessory;
accomplice; conspirator. Compare principal.
AID TO FAMILIES WITH DEPENDENT CHILDREN see social
security [AID TO FAMILIES WITH DEPENDENT CHILDREN].
AIR PIRACY see hijacking.
AIR RIGHTS the legal ownership of land includes the ownership of the
airspace above the land. A tree that has branches extending over a
neighbor’s property may therefore interfere with the neighbor’s air
rights. The rights are not limitless since, for example, airplanes are
allowed to fly at certain altitudes. Conversely, the rights do not allow an
owner to pollute the air.
AIRSPACE see air rights.
A.J. abbreviation for Associate Judge or Justice.
AKA abbreviation for “also known as.” See alias.
ALCOMETER see breathalyzer.
ALEATORY uncertain; risky. An ALEATORY CONTRACT is an agreement in
which performance by one party depends upon an uncertain or
contingent event—for example, a fire insurance contract is aleatory
because it is uncertain when or if benefits will be paid.
ALFORD PLEA see plea [ALFORD PLEA].
ALI see restatement.
ALIAS “otherwise known as”; an indication that a person is known by
more than one name. “AKA” and “a/k/a” mean “also known as” and are
used in indictments to introduce the listing of an alias.
ALIBI an excuse that proves the physical impossibility that a suspected
person could have committed the crime.
ALIEN one who is not a citizen of the country in which he lives. A
RESIDENT ALIEN is a person who has been admitted to permanent
resident status but has not been granted citizenship. An ILLEGAL ALIEN
is a noncitizen who has not been given permission by immigration
authorities to reside in the country in which he is living.
ALIENATION in real property law, the voluntary transfer of title and
possession of real property to another person. The law recognizes the
power to alienate (or transfer) property as an essential ingredient of fee
simple ownership of property and generally prohibits unreasonable
restraints on alienation.
ALIENATION OF AFFECTIONS a tort based upon willful and
malicious interference with the marriage relationship by a third party,
causing mental anguish, loss of social position, disgrace, embarrassment
or actual monetary loss. (Most states no longer recognize this as the
basis for a lawsuit.) If the interference is in the nature of adultery, the
tort is called CRIMINAL CONVERSATION. However, it may result from
lesser acts which deprive the other spouse of affection from his marital
partner. See consortium.
ALIENATION, ORDER OF see marshaling [marshalling].
ALIEN REGISTRATION see green card.
ALIEN TORT CLAIMS ACT adopted in 1789, provides that federal
district courts shall have original jurisdiction of any civil cause of action
by a foreign national alien for a tort committed in violation of the law
of nations or a treaty of the United States. The act thus permits federal
courts to hear human rights cases brought by foreign nationals for
conduct committed outside the United States. A more recent
codification, passed in 1992, is the TORTURE VICTIM PROTECTION ACT
which allows both aliens and citizens to bring civil actions against
individuals (in an official capacity for a foreign country that is on a
specified list) who torture, kill, or commit other human rights abuses.
ALIMONY court-ordered payment for the support of one’s estranged
spouse in the case of divorce or separation. For federal income tax
purposes, alimony payments are deductions to the paying spouse and
income to the receiving spouse if they are payable over an indefinite
period, or over a definite period lasting more than ten years.
CHILD SUPPORT, the amount of money the court requires one spouse to
pay to the other who has custody of the children born of the marriage,
may be imposed by the court with or without an award of alimony. See
deadbeat dad [mom].
ALIQUOT (ä’-le@-kwo@) Lat.: an even, fractional part of the whole. In a
trust, it is a particular fraction of the whole property involved, as
distinguished from a general interest.
ALI TEST see insanity [ALI TEST].
ALIUNDE (äl-e@-u*n’-da@) Lat.: from another source; from elsewhere; from
outside. ALIUNDE RULE refers to the doctrine that a verdict may not be
impeached by evidence offered by a juror unless the foundation for
introducing the evidence is laid first by competent, admissible evidence
from another source.
ALLEGATION in a pleading, an assertion of fact; a statement of the issue
that the contributing party expects to prove. See averment.
ALLEN CHARGE an instruction by the court to a jury that is having
difficulty reaching a verdict in a criminal case, to encourage the jury to
make a renewed effort to arrive at a decision. Because it may have a
coercive effect upon the jury, some jurisdictions no longer permit the
instruction to be given after the jury reports a deadlock.
ALLOCUTION the requirement in common law that, following the
verdict of conviction, the judge ask the defendant to show legal cause
why sentence should not be pronounced. It continues to be part of the
sentencing procedure in a majority of states and is a mandatory part of
a valid sentencing in the federal system. The modern allocution does not
ask the defendant why sentence should not be imposed but rather asks if
he or she has anything to say in his or her own behalf in mitigation of
punishment. See mitigating circumstances.
ALLODIAL owned freely; not subject to the restriction on alienation that
existed in feudal law.
ALLOWANCE see depletion [DEPLETION ALLOWANCE].
ALLUVION a deposit of sedimentary material (earth, sand, gravel, etc.)
that has accumulated gradually and imperceptibly along the bank of a
river or the sea. Alluvion is the result of accretion and is considered
part of the property to which it has become attached. See also avulsion.
ALSO KNOWN AS [AKA] see alias.
ALTERATION see material alteration.
ALTER EGO (äl’-tèr e@-go@) Lat: the other self. Under the doctrine of alter
ego, the law will disregard the limited personal liability one enjoys
when he or she acts in a corporate capacity and will regard the act as his
or her personal responsibility. To invoke the doctrine, it must be shown
that the corporation was a mere conduit for the transaction of private
business and that no separate identity of the individual and the
corporation really existed.
ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION [ADR] alternatives to the
slow and costly process of litigation. Includes arbitration, conciliation,
mediation, and summary proceedings. Some of these processes, such
as mediation and arbitration, are being used by court systems to attempt
to resolve disputes before trial.
ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX [AMT] the AMT attempts to ensure
that individuals who benefit from tax advantages such as deductions,
credits, and exemptions pay at least a minimum amount of tax. It
effectively creates a tax liability for individuals who would pay little or
no tax. In practice, the AMT is controversial, as it applied to more and
more taxpayers each year, beyond the intended targets of the tax.
Congress is attempting to correct or repeal the AMT.
ALTERNATIVE PLEADING in common law, a pleading that alleged
facts so inconsistent that it was difficult to determine upon which set of
facts the person pleading intended to rely. Alternative pleading is
generally permitted under modern procedure.
EXAMPLE: Corey is accused of murder. At his trial, he alternatively
pleads the insanity defense and self-defense. The two are alternatives:
the insanity plea means that Corey admits the murder but claims that his
mental state prevents him from being criminally responsible, while the
plea of self-defense means that he was justified in using deadly force in
the particular circumstance.
ALTERNATIVE WRIT OF MANDAMUS see preemptory writ.
AMBULANCE CHASING see barratry.
AMELIORATING WASTE see waste [AMELIORATING WASTE].
AMEND to alter. One amends a statute by changing (but not abolishing) an
established law. One amends a pleading by adding to or subtracting
from an already existing pleading.
EXAMPLE: Lily sues a manufacturing company for injuries resulting from
a defect in one of their products. After she files her papers with the
court, she discovers new facts which indicate that the company was
negligent in developing the product. Lily seeks to amend her pleading to
include these new facts, and, as is generally the case, she is permitted to
amend.
AMENDED PLEADINGS see pleadings [AMENDED PLEADINGS].
AMENDED RETURN see return [AMENDED RETURN].
AMENDMENTS see respective entries (e.g., First Amendment).
A MENSA ET THORO see divorce [SEPARATION].
AMERCEMENT a monetary penalty or fine or a chastisement, especially
of a public official.
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION [ABA] a national organization of
lawyers and law students that promotes improvements in the delivery of
legal services and the administration of justice. Membership is open to
any lawyer who is in good standing in any state or to any student
attending an accredited law school. The AMERICAN BAR FOUNDATION is a
subsidiary of the ABA that sponsors and funds projects in legal
research, education, and social studies.
AMERICAN BAR FOUNDATION see American Bar Association
[AMERICAN BAR FOUNDATION].
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION [ACLU] a national
organization, founded in 1920, that seeks to enforce and preserve the
rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the federal and state
constitutions. Its activities include handling cases, opposing allegedly
repressive legislation and publishing reports and informational
pamphlets.
AMERICAN DEPOSITORY RECEIPT [ADR] a receipt issued by
American banks to domestic buyers as a convenient substitute for direct
ownership of stock in foreign companies. ADR’s are traded on stock
exchanges and in over-the-counter markets like stocks of domestic
companies. Rights, offers, stock dividends and similar adjustments to
the underlying shares are paid in cash or ADR dividends by the bank.
AMERICAN INDIAN LAW see Indian law.
AMERICAN LAW INSTITUTE see restatement.
AMERICAN LAW INSTITUTE TEST see insanity [ALI TEST].
AMERICAN STOCK EXCHANGE Stock exchange which merged with
the New York Stock Exchange. It was formerly known as the NEW
YORK CURB EXCHANGE or “Curb” and is abbreviated today as either
AMEX or ASE.
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT [ADA] wide-ranging federal
legislation intended to make American society more accessible to
people with disabilities. Disability is defined as a physical or mental
impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.
The ADA has several key components including the following:
businesses of fifteen or more employees must provide reasonable
accommodations for disabled employees; all public services, including
state and local governments, cannot deny services or participation in
programs or activities which are available to people without disabilities;
public transportation systems must be accessible; public
accommodations including facilities such as restaurants, hotels, and
stores must be barrier free and accessible in new construction and in
existing facilities, barriers to services must be removed if readily
achievable; telecommunications companies must make provisions for
use by hard-of-hearing persons; and discrimination against persons with
disabilities or persons who assert rights under the ADA is not permitted.
AMEX see American Stock Exchange.
AMICUS CURIAE (aW-me@’-ku*s kyu@’-re@-ῑ) Lat.: friend of the court. A
qualified person who is not a party to the action but gives information
to the court on a question of law. The function of an amicus curiae is to
call attention to some information that might escape the court’s
attention. An AMICUS CURIAE BRIEF (or AMICUS BRIEF) is one submitted
by someone not a party to the lawsuit, to give the court information
needed to make a proper decision, or to urge a particular result on behalf
of the public interest or of a private interest of third parties who will be
indirectly affected by the resolution of the dispute. Thus, a court might
permit a group of retarded citizens to participate in a proceeding
brought by a prisoner rights group to challenge a statute authorizing the
expenditure of funds for the construction of prisons and mental health
facilities, since invalidation of the statute would adversely affect the
interests of retarded citizens.
AM. JUR. (2D) American Jurisprudence (second edition). An encyclopedia
of United States law.
AMNESTY a pardon extended to a group of persons excusing them for
offenses against the government. See executive clemency.
EXAMPLE: In an attempt to end the dissension caused by the Vietnam
War, President Carter granted amnesty to all draft evaders on certain
conditions. Those individuals entitled to amnesty were absolved of
liability for selective service violations.
AMORTIZATION the reduction of a debt by periodic charges to assets or
liabilities, such as payments on mortgages.
EXAMPLE: A landlord paves the parking lot for an apartment building. In
charging each tenant rental for a parking space, the landlord amortizes
the cost of the pavement so that, over a period of time, the tenant
actually pays for the work. If the landlord had borrowed the money to
fund the improvement, the landlord would amortize the loan by paying
it back over a fixed period of time.
In accounting statements, the term usually refers to charges against
investments in intangibles such as patents, copyrights, goodwill,
organization, expenses, etc. Compare depreciation.
AMOUNT REALIZED see realization [GAIN OR LOSS REALIZED].
AMT see alternative minimum tax [AMT].
AMW average monthly wage.
ANACONDA CLAUSE see mother hubbard clause [ANDACONDA
CLAUSE].
ANCIENT DEMESNE manors that were in the actual possession of the
Crown during the reign of William the Conqueror and that were
recorded as such in the Domesday Book. This type of tenure was
abolished in England by the Law of Property Act (1922). See demesne.
ANCILLARY JURISDICTION the jurisdiction under which a federal
court is permitted to decide an entire controversy (including matters
which it would not have authority to consider were they raised
independently) if the controversy contains other issues that the law
specifically authorizes federal courts to decide. Thus, when the court
has jurisdiction of the principal action, it may also hear any ancillary
proceeding, regardless of any other factor that would normally
determine jurisdiction. Compare pendent jurisdiction.
AND HIS HEIRS see heirs.
ANIMO (än’-ĭ-mo@) Lat.: intentionally.
AMINO REVERTENDI (re*-ve*r-te*n’-de@) with the intention to return.
AMINO REVOCANDI (re*-vo@-kän’-de@) with the intention to revoke.
AMINO TESTANDI (te*s-tän’-de@) with the intention to make a will.
ANIMUS see animo.
ANNOTATION a comment upon or collection of cases citing a particular
case or statute. An annotated statute is one that has the relevant cases
interpreting the statute appended to it. Thus, United States Code
Annotated (U.S.C.A.) or New Jersey Statutes Annotated (N.J.S.A.) are
annotated versions of the official statutes of those jurisdictions.
American Law Reports (A.L.R.) is an annotated set of recent cases from
the various state and federal courts. The current versions are A.L.R. 5th
and A.L.R. Fed.
ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE standardized method for expressing a
rate of interest on borrowed money (on a yearly basis) so that the
borrower will know the true cost of borrowing.
ANNUAL REPORT a formal financial statement issued yearly. The annual
report of publicly owned corporations must comply with SEC reporting
requirements, which include balance sheet, income statement, and
cash flow reports audited by an independent certified public accountant.
ANNUITANT one who receives the benefits of an annuity.
ANNUITY a fixed sum payable periodically, subject to the limitations
imposed by the grantor—generally, either for life or for a number of
years.
ANNUL to make void; to dissolve that which once existed, as to annul a
marriage. Annulment wipes out or invalidates the entire marriage,
whereas divorce only ends the marriage from that point on and does not
affect the former validity of the marriage.
ANSWER the defendant’s principal pleading in response to the plaintiff’s
complaint. It must contain a denial of all the allegations the defendant
wishes to dispute, as well as any affirmative defenses by the defendant
and any counterclaim against the plaintiff.
ANTENUPTIAL AGREEMENT see prenuptial agreement.
ANTICIPATORY BREACH (OF CONTRACT) breaking a contract
before the actual time of required performance. It occurs when one
person repudiates his contractual obligation before it is due, by
indicating that he will not or cannot perform his contractual duties.
EXAMPLE: Steven contracted with a fuel oil company to supply heating
oil to it. The contract called for twelve monthly deliveries over a year
period. After three months, Steven realized the contract would be too
costly for him to continue supplying the oil. He informed the company
that he would not deliver the oil at the next delivery date. His action
constitutes an anticipatory breach of his contract with the fuel oil
company.
Where anticipatory repudiation is by conduct rather than by
declaration, it may be called VOLUNTARY DISABLEMENT.
ANTICYBERSQUATTING CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT see
cybersquatting [cyberpiracy] [ANTICYBERSQUATTING CONSUMER
PROTECTION ACT].
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION ACT see Robinson-Patman Act.
ANTI-DUMPING LAW see dumping.
ANTILAPSE STATUTES statutes that allow the heirs of a devisee or
legatee who predeceases the testator to inherit what the testator had
bequeathed to the deceased devisee or legatee. Under common law, a
bequest lapsed upon the death of the specified recipient, so that, in
particular, when a parent died before the testator/ grandparent, the
grandchildren were disinherited.
ANTITRUST LAWS statutes that promote free competition by outlawing
such things as monopolies, price discrimination, and collaboration, for
the purpose of restraint of trade, between two or more business
enterprises in the same market. The two major U.S. antitrust laws are
the SHERMAN ACT and the CLAYTON ACT.
APA see Administrative Procedure Act [APA].
A POSTERIORI (ä po*s-te*r-e@-ô’-re@) Lat.: from the most recent point of
view. Relates to knowledge gained through actual experience or
observation, rather than through logical conclusions. Compare a priori.
APOSTILLE (SEAL) a certificate authenticating the signature of officials
on official documentation such as birth or death certificates, diplomas,
contracts or court orders from countries that are party to the Hague
Convention. Provides an international notarization accepted by
signatory countries. See also notary public.
APPARENT AUTHORITY a reference to the doctrine that a principal is
responsible for the acts of his or her agent where the principal by words
or conduct suggests to a third person that the agent may act in the
principal’s behalf, and where the third person believes in the authority
of the agent.
EXAMPLE: A business organization that sells athletic equipment used
Tim, a local sports star, to advertise and promote their products. His
actions made it seem that he was part of the business, and the business
did nothing to qualify that image. A manufacturer contracted with Tim
to supply the business with various types of equipment under their
belief that Tim was a part of that business. Although the business may
not want that equipment, they are forced to purchase it. Tim’s apparent
authority as agent of the business organization was due to the
organization’s acquiescence, and this false impression obliges them to
act in accordance with the contract.
APP. DIV. abbreviation for Appellate Division.
APPEAL a request to a higher court to review and reverse the decision of a
lower court. On appeal, no new evidence is introduced; the higher court
is limited to considering whether the lower court erred on a question of
law or gave a decision plainly contrary to the evidence presented during
trial. Unless special permission is granted by the higher court to hear an
interlocutory appeal, an appeal cannot be made until the lower court
renders a final judgment.
NOTICE OF APPEAL document filed with the appellate court giving
notice of an intention to appeal. It must be served on the opposing party
and must comply with specified deadlines for filing.
TRIAL DE NOVO historically, the appeal as it existed in equity allowed a
trial de novo on law and facts, while proceedings at law allowed only a
review on the record produced in the lower court for errors of law.
Today this distinction largely has merged into one system. Equitable
proceedings still, however, require a trial de novo more often than legal
proceedings, unless it has been specifically proscribed by statute. For
example, appeals from probate court decrees often are by trial de novo.
APPEARANCE the required coming into court of a plaintiff or defendant
in an action either by himself or herself (PRO SE) or through an attorney.
An appearance involves a voluntary submission to the jurisdiction of
the court.
EXAMPLE: Suze is arrested for possessing more than 25 grams of
marijuana. Once she employs an attorney, the attorney files a notice of
appearance with the court stating that he or she is Suze’s attorney and
will represent her in the forthcoming trial.
COMPULSORY APPEARANCE an appearance compelled by service of
process.
GENERAL APPEARANCE a party’s appearance at a proceeding for any
reason other than for questioning the court’s jurisdiction.
SPECIAL APPEARANCE an appearance for the sole purpose of questioning
the jurisdiction of the court over the defendant and the authority of the
court to compel his appearance for any other purpose.
EXAMPLE: A seller agrees to provide a buyer with certain goods. One
clause in the contract states that, if the goods are defective, the buyer
can only sue in the seller’s home state. The goods turn out to be
defective, but the buyer files suit in a court in the buyer’s home state.
The seller makes a special appearance in the court only for the purpose
of challenging that court’s jurisdiction based on the clause in the
contract. By such an appearance, the seller does not acknowledge the
court’s right to entertain the buyer’s suit against him.
VOLUNTARY APPEARANCE an appearance by one who has not been
required to appear by service of process.
APPEARANCE DE BENE ESSE see de bene esse.
APPELLANT the party to a lawsuit who appeals the decision to a higher
court. See plaintiff [PLAINTIFF IN ERROR]. Compare appellee.
APPELLATE [APPEALS] COURT a court having authority to review the
law applied by a lower court in the same case. In most instances, the
trial court first decides a lawsuit, with review of its decision then
available in an appellate court.
APPELLATE JURISDICTION see jurisdiction.
APPELLATION OF ORIGIN a term that refers to the specific
characteristics of wines, cheeses, butters, and other agricultural products
which are unique to a region. For example, the INDICATION OF SOURCE
would be “blue cheese from France” while the appellation of origin
might be “Roquefort” which is only applied to those cheeses aged in the
natural Cambalou caves of Roquefort-sur-Soulzon.
APPELLEE the party prevailing in the lower court who argues, on appeal,
against setting aside the lower court’s judgment. In some state courts
this party is referred to as the respondent. See defendant [DEFENDANT
IN ERROR]. Compare appellant.
APPOINTED COUNSEL see public defender; right to counsel.
APPOINTMENT OF RECEIVER the placing, by court order, of
contested property in the hands of a receiver in order to protect
someone’s ownership or trust interests in said property or funds. For
instance, the creditor of a bankrupt can have the bankrupt’s assets
placed in the custody of a receiver to stop the bankrupt from selling the
assets for cash or to prevent other creditors from seizing the assets.
APPOINTMENT, POWER OF see power of appointment.
APPORTION to divide fairly or proportionately, according to the parties’
respective interests.
APPRAISAL RIGHTS a statutory remedy available in many states to
minority stockholders [SHAREHOLDERS] who object to an extraordinary
action taken by the corporation (such as a merger). This remedy
requires the corporation to repurchase the stock of dissenting
stockholders at a price equivalent to its value immediately prior to the
extraordinary corporate action.
APPRAISE to estimate the value of property. Compare assess.
APPRECIATE 1. increase in value; 2. to understand the significance of
something; in criminal law, used in some statutes as part of the insanity
test, to signify that the defendant understands the wrongfulness of his or
her conduct.
APPRECIATION the excess of the fair market value of property over the
taxpayer’s basis in such property.
UNREALIZED APPRECIATION the amount of appreciation in property that
has not yet been subject to tax. See realization.
APPROPRIATE 1. to set apart for, or assign to, a particular purpose or
use; 2. to wrongfully use or take the property of another.
APPROPRIATION 1. the designation of funds for a specific government
expenditure. 2. the tort arising from the use of a person’s name, picture,
or likeness as a symbol of his or her identity without compensation.
APPURTENANT attached to something else. In property law, the term
refers especially to the attachment of a restriction (e.g., an easement or
covenant) to a piece of land, which benefits or restricts the owner of
such land in his use and enjoyment. To illustrate: if A allows B the
right-of-way over A’s land so that B has access to the highway, this is an
easement appurtenant to B’s land. See easement [EASEMENT
APPURTENANT].
APR see annual percentage rate.
A PRIORI (ä pre@-ô’-re@) Lat.: from the former, from the first. Modern usage
has deviated significantly from the Latin. An a priori conclusion or
judgment is one that is necessarily true, that is neither proved by nor
capable of being disproved by experience, and that is known to be true
by a process of reasoning independent of all factual evidence.
The term is commonly used to indicate a judgment that is widely
believed to be certain, or that is introduced presumptively, without
analysis or investigation. Thus to accuse someone of having assumed a
fact or conclusion a priori is often to disparage him or her for having
failed to support a judgment through evidence or analysis. Compare a
posteriori.
ARBITER (är’-bĭt-eWr) Lat.: referee. A person (other than a judicial officer)
appointed by the court to decide a controversy according to the law.
Unlike an arbitrator, the arbiter needs the court’s confirmation of his
decision for it to be final.
ARBITRAGE a kind of hedged investment wherein the arbitrageur
simultaneously buys and sells the same assets (such as securities or
commodities) in different markets or exchanges in order to profit from
slight differences in price. True arbitrage positions are completely
HEDGED—that is, the performance of both sides of the transaction is
guaranteed at the time the position is assumed—and are thus without
risk of loss.
KIND ARBITRAGE purchase of a security that is without restriction, other
than the purchase of money, exchangeable or convertible within a
reasonable time into a second security together with a simultaneous
offsetting sale of the second security.
SPACE ARBITRAGE purchase in one market against sale in another
market.
TIME ARBITRAGE most common form — the purchase of a commodity
against a present sale of the identical commodity for future delivery.
ARBITRARY AND CAPRICIOUS see abuse of discretion.
ARBITRATION submitting a controversy to an impartial person, the
arbitrator, chosen by the two parties in the dispute to determine an
equitable settlement. Where the parties agree to be bound by the
determination of the arbitrator, the process is called BINDING
ARBITRATION.
In labor law, arbitration has become an important means of settling
disputes, and the majority of labor contracts provide for arbitration of
disputes over the meaning of contract clauses.
COMPULSORY ARBITRATION, in which the parties are forced to agree, is
generally not provided for in federal law. The states, however, have
increasingly provided for compulsory arbitration in areas beyond the
control of federal law, such as police and firefighters’ contracts.
NONBINDING ARBITRATION process where the parties are free to follow
the arbitrator’s findings or disregard them and proceed to court. The
arbitrator’s decision is not final.
ARBITRATION CLAUSE a clause in a contract providing for
arbitration of disputes arising under the contract. Arbitration clauses
are treated as separable parts of the contract so that the illegality of
another part of the contract does not nullify such agreement and a
breach or repudiation of the contract does not preclude the right to
arbitrate.
ARBITRATOR an impartial person chosen by the parties to solve a
dispute between them, who is empowered to make a final determination
concerning the issue(s) in controversy, who is bound only by his or her
own discretion, and from whose decision there is no appeal. The
decision of the arbitrator (the counterpart of a court’s order or
judgment) is called the AWARD. A court order enforcing an arbitrator’s
award is called CONFIRMATION. Compare arbiter; conciliator;
mediator.
ARGUENDO (är-gyu@-e*n’-do@) Lat.: for the sake of argument.
EXAMPLE: Ace Chemical Company is accused of dumping toxic wastes
in a canal outside the city. Although the company does not want to
admit that it polluted the canal, for public relations reasons it is willing
to pay the cleanup costs. In approaching the city to determine the dollar
figure for those costs, the company will state, “Assuming, arguendo,
that we did pollute the canal, how much will the cleanup cost?” By
“assuming arguendo,” the company avoids admitting guilt and moves
on to the more important questions of cleanup.
ARGUMENT a course of reasoning intended to establish a position and to
induce belief.
ARM’S LENGTH a relatively equal bargaining position between
contracting parties, in which the agreement reached is seen as free of
one-sidedness, duress, unconscionability, or overreaching by either
party.
ARRAIGN to bring a defendant to court to answer the charge under which
an indictment has been handed down.
ARRAIGNMENT an initial step in the criminal process in which the
defendant is formally charged with an offense, given a copy of the
complaint, indictment, information, or other accusatory instrument,
and informed of his or her constitutional rights, including the pleas he
or she may enter. Where the appearance is shortly after the arrest, it may
properly be called a presentment since often no plea is taken. Compare
preliminary hearing.
ARRANGEMENTS see bankruptcy [CHAPTER 11 REORGANIZATION].
ARRAY see challenge [CHALLENGE TO JURY ARRAY].
ARREARS that which is unpaid although due to be paid. A person in
arrears is behind in payment.
ARREST to deprive a person of liberty by legal authority; in the technical
criminal law sense, to seize an alleged or suspected offender to answer
for a crime.
ARREST OF JUDGMENT the court’s withholding of judgment because
of some error in the record.
ARREST RECORD see criminal record.
ARSON the willful and malicious burning of another’s house; sometimes
expanded by statute to include acts similar to burning (such as
exploding) or the destruction of property other than dwellings.
ARTICLES OF IMPEACHMENT a formal statement of the grounds
upon which the removal of a public official is sought, similar to an
indictment in an ordinary criminal proceeding. In the federal system,
articles of impeachment are voted by the House of Representatives,
with the trial occurring before the Senate.
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION the document that creates a private
corporation, according to the general corporation laws of the state.
ARTIFICE a fraud or a cunning device used to accomplish some wrong;
usually implies craftiness or deceitfulness.
ARTIFICIAL PERSON see corporation.
ART, WORDS OF see words of art.
ASA assistant state’s attorney. See prosecutor.
AS A MATTER OF LAW see operation of law.
ASE see American Stock Exchange.
AS IS a commercial term denoting agreement that buyer shall accept
delivery of goods in the condition in which they are found on inspection
prior to purchase, even if they are damaged or defective.
ASO see administrative services only. Also may mean “as subrogee of.”
ASPORTATION see caption; trespass [TRESPASS DE BONIS ASPORTATIS].
ASSAULT an attempt or apparent attempt to inflict bodily injury upon
another by using unlawful force, accompanied by the apparent ability to
injure that person if not prevented. An assault need not result in a
touching so as to constitute a battery. Thus, no physical injury need be
proved to establish an assault. An assault may be either a civil or
criminal offense. Some jurisdictions have defined criminal assault to
include battery—the actual physical injuring.
AGGRAVATED ASSAULT an assault where serious bodily injury is inflicted
on the person assaulted; an assault with a dangerous or deadly weapon.
ASSAULT, SEXUAL see rape [SEXUAL ASSAULT].
ASSEMBLY, UNLAWFUL see unlawful assembly.
ASSESS 1. to determine the value of something; 2. to fix the value of
property on the basis of which property taxes will be calculated.
Compare appraise.
ASSESSMENT OF DEFICIENCY in general, the amount of tax
determined to be due after an appellate review within the Internal
Revenue Service and a Tax Court adjudication (if requested).
JEOPARDY ASSESSMENT an immediate assessment of the deficiency by
the Internal Revenue Service without appellate review and Tax Court
hearing, which is permitted if, in the opinion of the Internal Revenue
Service, the assessment and collection of a deficiency would be
jeopardized by delay.
ASSET anything owned that has monetary value; any interest in real
property or personal property that can be used for payment of debts.
EXAMPLE: Luciana wants to borrow a sizeable amount of money to build
a summer house in the mountains. Although banks are generally
unwilling to lend money for such projects, they will lend to Luciana
because she has substantial assets, including ownership of several
buildings and a large number of stocks. Such assets are generally
pledged as collateral. With respect to real property, Luciana might give
the bank a mortgage as a form of collateral.
Assets appear as one of three major balance sheet categories and are
counterbalanced by liabilities and net assets. In corporations, net assets
are usually referred to as shareholder’s equity or book value.
CURRENT ASSETS for accounting purposes, property that can be easily
converted into cash, such as marketable securities, accounts receivable
(goods or services sold but not paid for) and inventories (raw materials,
work in process and finished goods intended for future sale).
FIXED ASSETS in accounting, property used for production of goods and
services, such as plant and machinery, buildings, land, mineral
resources.
Other categories of assets include intangibles, such as goodwill,
patent rights and acquisition costs in excess of fair market value, and
tangibles, such as long-term investments in other companies, long-term
receivables, insurance owned.
ASSET VALUE see net asset value.
ASSEVECATION oath or declaration.
ASSIGN to transfer one’s interest in property, contract or other rights to
another.
ASSIGNED COUNSEL see public defender; right to counsel.
ASSIGNED RISK in automobile insurance, a class of persons to whom
insurance companies will not issue policies voluntarily, usually because
their record of prior accidents has made them a high risk, and who
therefore are assigned by state law to insurance companies and must pay
higher rates. Many states have FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAWS that
prohibit such persons from driving unless adequate insurance has been
obtained.
ASSIGNEE see assigns [assignees].
ASSIGNMENT the transfer to another of one’s interest in a right or
property.
ASSIGNMENT FOR BENEFIT OF CREDITORS a debtor’s transfer of his
property to another party to be held in trust and applied to the debts of
the assignor (debtor).
ASSIGNMENT OF A LEASE the transfer of the lessee’s entire interest in the
lease, by which the assignee of the lease becomes primarily liable for
any rent required to be paid under the lease, and the assignor (original
lessee) remains secondarily liable for the rent if the assignee does not
pay it.
ASSIGNMENT OF ERROR the appellant’s declaration or complaint
against the trial judge that he committed an error in the lower court
proceedings. Assignments of error establish the issues to be argued on
appeal.
ASSIGNMENT OF INCOME a taxpayer’s direction that income earned
by him or her be paid to another person, so that it will be considered the
other person’s income for federal tax purposes. An effective assignment
of income would be to transfer a share of dividend-paying stock before
the dividend declaration date—in such a case the dividend would be
taxed to the transferee; an ineffective assignment of income would be to
transfer the share after the dividend declaration date—here the dividend
would be taxed to the transferor.
ASSIGNMENT OF MORTGAGE see mortgage [ASSIGNMENT OF
MORTGAGE].
ASSIGNOR one who transfers property to another. Synonymous with
GRANTOR. The grantor of a trust is the creator of the trust.
ASSIGNS [ASSIGNEES] all those who take from another by deed upon
the transfer of real property, or under a will, or, in the absence of a valid
will, those who inherit the property of the intestate by operation of law.
See descent.
ASSISTED SUICIDE see euthanasia [ACTIVE EUTHANASIA].
ASSIZE ancient writ issued from a court of assize to the sheriff for the
recovery of property; actions of the special court that issues the writ.
See Court of Assize and Nisi Prius.
ASSOCIATE JUSTICE a member of the United States Supreme Court,
other than the Chief Justice; the title held by a judge, other than the
presiding judge, on the highest court of some states.
ASSOCIATION a group of persons joined together for a certain object.
ASSUMPSIT (aW-su*mp’-sĭt) Lat.: he promised; he undertook. In contract
law, the term signifies an express or implied promise or undertaking,
made either orally or in writing not under seal. The term refers
especially to one of the old forms of action in common law comprising
an action in equity and applicable to almost every case in which money
had been received that in equity and good conscience ought to have
been refunded.
ASSUMPTION OF MORTGAGE see mortgage.
ASSUMPTION OF RISK 1. in torts, an affirmative defense used by the
defendant in a negligence suit, claiming that plaintiff had knowledge of
an obviously dangerous condition or situation and yet voluntarily
exposed himself to the hazard, thereby relieving the defendant of legal
responsibility for any resulting injury; 2. in contract law, the agreement
by an employee to assume the risks of ordinary hazards arising out of
his occupation.
Contributory negligence arises when plaintiff fails to exercise due
care, while assumption of risk arises regardless of the care used and is
based fundamentally on consent.
ASSURANCE see covenant [COVENANT OF FURTHER ASSURANCE].
ASSURED see insured.
ASYLUM a shelter for the unfortunate or afflicted—the insane, the
crippled, the poor. A POLITICAL ASYLUM is a state that accepts a citizen
of another state to shelter him from prosecution by that other state.
AT BAR see bar.
AT EQUITY see equity.
AT ISSUE see issue.
AT LAW that which pertains to or is governed by the rules of law, as
distinguished from the rules of equity; according to the rules of the
common law. In England, and later in the United States, courts of law
developed strict rules establishing the kinds of causes of action that
could be maintained and the kinds of remedies that were available.
Courts of equity established different rules and remedies, partly to
mitigate the rigors of the law courts. “At law” and “in equity” thus refer
to two different bodies of jurisprudence.
The term also may be used to mean by operation of law.
ATM abbreviation for automated [automatic] teller machine.
AT-RISK see tax shelter [AT-RISK RULES].
ATROCIOUS outrageously wicked and vile. An atrocious act
demonstrates depraved and insensitive brutality and exhibits a
senselessly immoderate use of extreme violence for a criminal purpose.
ATTACHMENT a legal proceeding by which a defendant’s property is
taken into custody and held for payment of a judgment in the event
plaintiff’s demand is later established and judgment is rendered in his
favor.
ATTAINDER in common law, the elimination of all civil rights and
liberties, and the forfeiture of property, caused by one’s conviction for a
felony or capital offense. See bill of attainder.
ATTAINDER, BILL OF see bill of attainder.
ATTAINT to pass sentence of attainder or to be under such a sentence;
more generally to be stained or degraded by a conviction. In early
common law practice this referred to a writ used to challenge a jury
verdict.
ATTEMPT an overt act, beyond mere preparation, moving directly toward
the actual commission of a criminal offense. The attempt to accomplish
a criminal act is often made a crime itself, separate and distinct from the
crime that is attempted. See inchoate. Compare conspiracy.
ATTENDANT CIRCUMSTANCES loose facts surrounding an event. In
criminal law the definitions of crimes often require the presence or
absence of attendant circumstances. For example, statutory rape
requires that the minor be under the age of consent, the age of the
minor being the attendant circumstance.
ATTEST to affirm as true; to sign one’s name as a witness to the execution
of a document; to bear witness to.
EXAMPLE: Where a person writes a will, that person must understand the
nature of what he or she is doing when the will is signed and what the
various provisions of the will mean. The laws of most states require that
at least two persons attest to, or formally confirm, the writer’s ability to
meet these requirements. These persons are witnesses to the will.
ATTESTATION the act of authentication by witnessing an instrument
of writing, at the request of the party making the instrument, and
subscribing it as a witness. Attestation entails witnessing and
certification that the instrument exists.
ATTORNEY synonymous with lawyer. May refer to an attorney in fact or
an attorney at law. An ATTORNEY IN FACT is one who is an agent or
representative of another given authority to act in that person’s place
and name. The document giving the attorney authority is called a power
of attorney.
The general reference to an attorney is usually intended to designate
an ATTORNEY AT LAW. This is one of a class of persons admitted by the
state’s highest court or by a federal court to practice law in that
jurisdiction. The attorney is regarded as an officer of the court and is
always subject to the admitting court’s jurisdiction as to his or her
ethical and professional conduct. Violations of those standards of
conduct may result in discipline of the attorney in the form of censure,
suspension, or disbarment. See counsel [COUNSELLOR]; district
attorney; public defender.
ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE privilege that confidential
communications between an attorney and a client in the course of the
professional relationship cannot be disclosed without the consent of the
client. It is the oldest of the privileges for confidential communications
known to the common law. Its purpose is to encourage full and frank
communication between attorneys and their clients and thereby promote
broader public interests in the observance of law and administration of
justice. Such communications may take the form of oral or written
statements or may be actions and gestures. Communications made to an
attorney while seeking to obtain representation, even though the
attorney did not ultimately represent the client, are nonetheless
privileged. The privilege protects discussions of past crimes but does
not extend to the client’s proposed commission of future crimes. If third
parties (generally including relatives and friends but excluding law
clerks, stenographers, or interpreters) are present, the privilege may be
destroyed. The privilege extends indefinitely, and does not terminate
when the attorney/client relationship ends or when either party dies.
Communications between a corporate general counsel and corporate
employees have been found to be protected. Finally, the privilege to
prohibit disclosure belongs to the client, and as such may be waived by
the client.
ACCOUNTANT-CLIENT PRIVILEGE available in about one-third of the
states rendering confidential all communications to an accountant. Such
communications are not otherwise privileged. If the accountant is also
an attorney, the attorney-client privilege may not apply if the
accountant-attorney was acting in the capacity of an accountant. If,
however, a client communicates to an accountant designated by the
client’s attorney in confidence for the purpose of obtaining legal advice
from the lawyer, it is then privileged. See privileged communications.
ATTORNEY GENERAL the chief law enforcement officer of the federal
government or of a state government.
ATTORNEY OF RECORD see of record [ATTORNEY OF RECORD].
ATTORNEY, POWER OF see power of attorney.
ATTORNEY’S FEE the attorney’s charge for services in representing a
client; also, the additional award made by the court to the successful
party in a lawsuit to compensate for the reasonable value of the services
of the attorney.
ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE the doctrine in tort law which holds that one
who maintains something dangerous on his premises that is likely to
attract children is required to reasonably protect the children against the
dangers of that attraction. Thus, one has a duty to fence swimming
pools, to remove doors from discarded refrigerators, to enclose partially
constructed buildings and to be sensitive to other potentially dangerous
conditions that attract curious children.
AUCTION see sale [AUCTION SALE].
AUDIT an inspection of the accounting records and procedures of a
business, government unit or other reporting entity by a trained
accountant, for the purpose of verifying the accuracy and completeness
of the records. It may be conducted by a member of the organization
(internal audit) or by an outsider (independent audit).
EXAMPLE: Since its inception, a welfare agency has been criticized for
mismanagement of federal money by the agency directors and for
allowing people to file double and sometimes triple claims. The General
Accounting Office, an agency of the federal government, agrees to
conduct an audit to determine if these allegations are true and to trace
where the money had been spent.
See audit of return.
AUDIT OF RETURN a review by an agent of the Internal Revenue
Service of the tax return filed by the taxpayer and of the books and
records supporting the information contained on the tax return. See
return, income tax.
AUDITOR 1. a public officer charged by law with the duty of examining
and verifying the expenditure of public funds; 2. an accountant who
performs a similar function for private parties.
AUTHENTICATE certify; corroborate; to prove genuine. Authentication
may be established by witness testimony or by an expert.
AUTHORITY the permission or power delegated to another. This may be
express or implied. See de facto [DE FACTO AUTHORITY]. If express, it is
usually embraced in a document called a power of attorney. IMPLIED
AUTHORITY stems from a relationship such as that of principal and
agent. If the agent does not have EXPRESS AUTHORITY by some writing,
he or she nonetheless will have apparent authority. If the authority is
given to the agent for a consideration, it is said to be an AUTHORITY
COUPLED WITH AN INTEREST. Where not to infer an authority would
result in an injustice, the law will imply an authority so as not to
mislead another. In this circumstance the law speaks of an AUTHORITY
BY ESTOPPEL. Where the principal intended the agent to have the right to
act on the principal’s behalf, the authority is called an ACTUAL
AUTHORITY.
The term may also refer to the jurisdiction of a court such as “within
the court’s authority.” It is also used to denote judicial or legislative
precedent.
AUTHORIZED ISSUE the total number of shares of capital stock that a
corporation may issue under its charter.
AUTOMATED CRIME see computer crime.
AUTOMATIC [ELECTRONIC] DATA CAPTURE technologies such as
magnetic stripes, radio frequency identification tags, bar codes and
speech, iris, or facial recognition systems, which provide identifying
information by way of stored digital files without the need to manually
re-enter the data.
AUTOMOBILE, DEATH BY see homicide; manslaughter [DEATH BY
AUTOMOBILE].
AUTOMOBILE GUEST STATUTE see guest statute.
AUTOPSY the dissection of a cadaver to determine the cause of death. It
may involve the inspection of important organs in order to determine
the nature of a disease or abnormality.
AVERMENT a positive statement or allegation of facts in a pleading, as
distinguished from one based on reasoning or on inference.
AVOID to cancel or make void; to prevent a certain result.
AVOIDANCE see confession and avoidance.
AVOIDANCE OF TAX the method by which a taxpayer reduces his tax
liability without committing fraud—e.g., by investing in a tax shelter.
Compare evasion of tax.
AVULSION an abrupt change in the course or channel of a stream that
forms the boundary between two parcels of land, resulting in an
apparent loss of part of the land of one riparian landowner and an
apparent increase in the land of the other. The sudden and perceptible
nature of this change distinguishes avulsion from accretion: when the
change is abrupt, as in avulsion, the boundary between the two
properties remains unaltered. When the changes are brought about by
accretion—i.e., gradually, as a result of natural causes—the changed
boundaries are recognized, and ownership interests are affected.
AWARD see arbitrator [AWARD].
AWOL see desertion [ABSENT WITHOUT LEAVE].
B
BAD CHECK a check that is dishonored on presentation because of
nonsufficient funds [NSF], unavailable funds, or a closed bank
account. Issuing a bad check is a form of larceny [theft] and is
generally punished as a misdemeanor although in some jurisdictions it
is a more serious offense if the amount of the check is substantial. An
affirmative defense is usually provided if the maker of the check, upon
notice of dishonor, promptly satisfies the payee. See check kiting.
BAD DEBT a debt that is not collectible and is therefore worthless to the
creditor; a debt that becomes uncollectible because the debtor is
insolvent. A nonbusiness bad debt is deductible from gross income as a
short-term capital loss whereas a business bad debt is allowable as a
deduction against ordinary income. See income [GROSS INCOME;
ORDINARY INCOME]; capital gains or losses [SHORT-TERM CAPITAL
GAINS OR LOSSES].
BAD FAITH breach of faith; a willful failure to respond to plain, wellunderstood statutory or contractual obligations; dishonesty in fact in the
conduct or transaction concerned.
BADGES OF FRAUD facts or circumstances surrounding a transaction
that indicate it may be fraudulent, especially in fraud of creditors.
These badges include fictitious consideration, false statements as to
consideration, transactions different from the usual method of doing
business, transfer of all of a debtor’s property, insolvency, confidential
relationship of the parties, and transfers in anticipation of a lawsuit or an
execution of judgment.
BAD TITLE a purported title that is legally insufficient to convey property
to the purchaser. A title that is not a marketable title is not necessarily
a bad title, but a title that is bad is not marketable and is one that a
purchaser ordinarily may not be compelled to accept.
BAIL a monetary or other security given to secure the release of a
defendant until time of trial and to assure his or her appearance at
every stage of the proceedings. Very often today an accused will be
released “ROR” (release on recognizance) without bail so long as he
promises to appear as required.
BAIL BOND the document executed in order to secure the release of an
individual in legal custody. The BAIL BONDSMAN, who acts as surety,
generally forfeits his or her security in the event the defendant jumps
bail—that is, fails to appear as required for court dates.
BAILEE a party who holds the personal property of another for a specific
purpose agreed to between the parties. See bailment.
EXAMPLE: Clark owns a considerable amount of bonds that are payable
on a certain date to whoever holds the documents. As a security
precaution, Clark delivers the bonds to his bank to hold for him in a
custodial capacity. The bank acts as a bailee of the bonds; Clark is the
bailor. If Clark had placed the bonds in a rented safety deposit box, no
bailment would have been created.
BAILIFF 1. a court attendant; 2. a person to whom some care,
guardianship or jurisdiction is entrusted: e.g., a steward who has
charge of lands, goods and chattels to get the best benefit for the owner;
a person appointed by private persons to collect rents and manage their
estate; or a court-appointed guardian of an incompetent.
BAIL JUMPING see jump bail.
BAILMENT a delivery of personal property to be held in trust; the
relationship that arises where one person, the bailor, delivers property
to another, the bailee, to hold, with control and possession of the
property passing to the bailee.
ACTUAL BAILMENT one established by an actual or constructive delivery
of the property to the bailee or the bailee’s agents.
BAILMENT FOR HIRE one that arises from contract in which the bailor
agrees to compensate the bailee as, for example, in the case of
delivering one’s car to a garage attendant. If the bailment is intended to
result in some additional benefit for the bailor, such as a repair of his or
her vehicle during the bailment, it may be referred to as a BAILMENT
FOR MUTUAL BENEFIT.
BAILMENT FOR MUTUAL BENEFIT one in which the parties contemplate
some compensation for benefits flowing from the bailment resulting
from an express or implied undertaking to that effect. Compare
BAILMENT FOR HIRE.
CONSTRUCTIVE BAILMENT one that arises when the person having
possession holds it under such circumstances that the law imposes an
obligation to deliver to another, even where such person did not come
into possession voluntarily, and where therefore no bailment was
voluntarily established.
GRATUITOUS BAILMENT one that results when care and custody of the
bailor’s property is accepted by the bailee without charge and without
any consideration or expectation of benefit. In a gratuitous bailment,
the bailee is liable to the bailor for the loss of bailed property only if the
loss is caused by bailee’s gross negligence.
INVOLUNTARY BAILMENT one that arises when the owner accidentally
and without negligence leaves personal property in the possession of
any person. An involuntary bailment arises if an umbrella is left with
the coat check at a restaurant. Compare abandonment.
BAILOR a person who delivers personal property to another to be held in
bailment. The bailor need not be the owner of the property involved.
EXAMPLE: A hotel maid finds a necklace in a hallway. She leaves it with
the clerk responsible for locking up the guests’ jewelry, who will hold it
until the rightful owner claims the necklace. The maid is the bailor of
the necklace. In this instance, the bailment is involuntary and gratuitous.
In instances where one pays a fee for another to hold his property (as in
a parking lot situation), the bailment is one “for hire.”
BAIT AND SWITCH a method of consumer deception practiced by
retailers that involves advertising in such an attractive way as to bring
the customer in, followed by disparagement of the advertised product
(that the seller in truth does not desire to sell) to cause the customer to
switch to a more expensive product. This device is also frequently
termed DISPARAGEMENT. Statutes in many states prohibit this sort of
advertising.
BALANCE SHEET a financial statement that gives an accounting picture
of property owned by a company and of claims against the property on a
specific date. See assets, liabilities.
BALANCING (TEST) principle basic to the justice system of weighing
both sides of an issue; examining the pros and cons. The ultimate goal is
to seek equality or evenhandedness (a perfect balance).
Constitutionally, it involves individual rights guaranteed by the
Constitution weighed against states rights in such areas as equal
protection and freedom of speech and press.
BALANCING OF EQUITIES weighing of conveniences, hardships, and
policies as would be done in a Court of Equity.
BALANCING OF INTERESTS involves constitutional principles; the
individual versus the State. Often involved in issues of interstate
commerce.
BALLOON MORTGAGE [NOTE] see mortgage [BALLON MORTGAGE
[NOTE]].
BANC bench. See en banc.
BANK a corporation formed to maintain savings and checking accounts,
issue loans and credit, and deal in negotiable securities issued by
government agencies and by corporations. Banks are strictly regulated
and fall into the following three categories according to the limitations
upon their activities:
COMMERCIAL BANK the most common and most unrestricted type of
bank, allowed the most latitude in its services and investments. Its major
limitation: it must keep on reserve a larger percentage of its deposits
than the other two types of banks.
SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION (or BUILDING AND LOAN ASSOCIATION)
similar to a savings bank in history and operation, except that the
savings and loan association’s primary purpose has been to provide
loans for purchasing and building homes. In 1981 these institutions
were authorized to offer a variant on checking accounts called a
negotiable order of withdrawal (“NOW” account), which allows
depositors to write checks against their interest-bearing savings account.
SAVINGS BANK the least common type of bank, prevalent only on the
East Coast and in the Midwest. Its major service traditionally has been
the time-savings account, from which money could be withdrawn only
after a set period or upon thirty days’ notice. Its services, however, have
been expanded in some instances. By law a savings bank’s investments
are usually limited to certain corporate and government bonds and
securities. Its advantages: it can pay higher interest rates than
commercial banks, has certain tax benefits and can keep on reserve a
smaller percentage of deposits. Usually, the bank is owned by its
depositors as creditors whose dividends are paid as interest on their
accounts. See member bank; nonmember bank. See also thrift
institutions.
BANKER’S LIEN the authority enjoyed by a banker to appropriate a
depositor’s funds or securities that are in the banker’s possession and
are not dedicated to a special purpose (as a trust) in order to satisfy a
debt owed by the depositor to the bank.
BANKRUPTCY popularly defined as insolvency, the inability of a debtor
to pay his or her debts as they become due. Technically, however, it is
the legal process under the Federal Bankruptcy Act by which assets of
the debtor are liquidated as quickly as possible to pay off creditors and
to discharge the bankrupt, or free the debtor of his or her debts, so that
he or she may start anew. In reorganization, on the other hand,
liquidation may be avoided and the debtor may continue to function,
pay creditors and carry on business. At the state level, INSOLVENCY
PROCEEDINGS may be brought to obtain more limited relief. bankruptcy
trustee refers to the person who takes legal title to the property of the
debtor and holds it “in trust” for equitable distribution among the
creditors. In most districts, the trustee is appointed by the bankruptcy
judge or selected by the creditors and approved by the judge. In a
limited number of “pilot districts,” a UNITED STATES TRUSTEE, appointed
by the Attorney General, served as or supervised the trustee.
DEBTOR REHABILITATION refers to those provisions of the Code that
enable the rehabilitation and reorganization of the debtor. Creditors are
paid out of future earnings of the debtor rather than the liquidation of
the debtor’s property. This includes business reorganizations (see
chapter 11 reorganization). See trustee [TRUSTEE IN BANKRUPTCY].
Compare receivership.
CHAPTER 11 REORGANIZATION in addition to voluntary and involuntary
proceedings in which a debtor is adjudged bankrupt, under Chapter 11 a
debtor is permitted to postpone all payments on debts so that he or she
can reorganize his or her business. While other bankruptcy
proceedings seek to have the debtor’s assets sold and to have all the
creditors paid to the extent possible, Chapter 11 seeks to give the debtor
a breathing spell with the hope that the business will recover and all the
creditors will be fully repaid. The goal is a plan that specifies how much
the creditors will be paid, in what form they will be paid, and other
details. See debt; insolvency.
INVOLUNTARY PROCEEDING a proceeding to seize all the insolvent
debtor’s nonexempt property, to distribute it equally among creditors
and to release the debtor from liability. Additional qualified creditors
have an absolute right to join in the original lawsuit at any time before
judgment is entered.
VOLUNTARY PROCEEDING a proceeding under the Federal Bankruptcy
Act whereby an insolvent debtor may file a petition to be declared a
voluntary bankrupt.
BANKRUPTCY COURT a United States district court created specifically
to carry out the Federal Bankruptcy Act.
BANKRUPTCY PETITION see petition in bankruptcy.
BAR 1. in procedure, a barrier to the relitigating of an issue. A bar operates
to deny a party the right or privilege of rechallenging issues in
subsequent litigation. The prevailing party in a lawsuit can use his or
her favorable decision to bar retrial of the action. See collateral
[COLLATERAL ESTOPPEL]; res judicata.
2. a particular position in the courtroom; hence, the defendant
standing before the judge is sometimes called the prisoner AT BAR. The
complete body of attorneys is called the bar because they are the
persons privileged to enter beyond the bar that separates the general
courtroom audience from the judge’s bench. The CASE AT BAR refers to
the particular action before the court.
BARGAIN a mutual voluntary agreement between two parties for the
exchange or purchase of some specified goods. The term also implies
negotiation over the terms of an agreement.
EXAMPLE: As a favor to his neighbor, Craig agrees not to erect a swing
set in his yard. Two years later, Craig’s grandson moves in with him.
Craig decides to build the swing set to keep the grandson happy. He is
not prevented from building the set even though he had previously told
his neighbor he would not erect one. The earlier agreement is not
binding on Craig because it was not a bargained-for exchange. The
neighbor provided nothing in the agreement as consideration for
Craig’s promise; the promise was a gratuitous one.
BARGAIN AND SALE a contract, or deed in the form of a contract, that
conveys property and transfers title to the buyer but lacks any
guarantee from the seller as to the validity of the title. It is commonly
used to convey title to real estate today and in effect transfers to the new
owner whatever interest the grantor had. It is often combined with a
COVENANT AGAINST GRANTOR’S ACTS, an assurance that the grantor has
not impaired the title by, for example, conveying the property, or part of
it, to someone else. Compare quitclaim deed; warranty deed.
BARGAINING UNIT the labor union or other group that represents
employees in collective bargaining.
BARRATRY in common law, the crime of stirring up suits and quarrels,
either at law or otherwise. Generally, the statutory crime of barratry is
restricted to the practice of instigating groundless lawsuit, to the
lawyer’s profit.
BARRISTER in England, a legal practitioner whose function is similar to
that of an American trial lawyer, although the barrister does not prepare
the case from the start. His SOLICITOR assembles the materials necessary
for presentation to the court and settles cases out of court.
BAR SINISTER the fact or condition of being born out of wedlock.
EXAMPLE: Fearing that he would be labeled a bastard, Seth kept his
background a secret until he realized that the bar sinister made no
difference to his friends.
BARTER the exchange of goods or services without using money. See
exchange.
BASIS an amount usually representing the taxpayer’s cost in acquiring an
asset. It is used for a variety of tax purposes including computation of
gain or loss on the sale or exchange of the asset and depreciation with
respect to the asset.
ADJUSTED BASIS during the time that a taxpayer holds an asset, certain
events require that the taxpayer adjust (either up or down) his or her
original basis to reflect the event, thus resulting in an adjusted basis. In
general, depreciation deductions allowable in a taxable year with
respect to an asset reduce the taxpayer’s basis in the asset. On the other
hand, if the taxpayer made a CAPITAL EXPENDITURE (see capital) for the
asset, the amount of the expenditure would increase the taxpayer’s
basis.
CARRYOVER or SUBSTITUTED BASIS in certain cases a taxpayer’s basis is
computed by reference to the basis of the property when held by the
previous owner or to the basis of the property exchanged for the assets.
In both these situations, the taxpayer’s basis is said to be a carryover
basis. For example, if a taxpayer received a gift of property, his basis in
the property is the transferor’s basis in the property. In other words, the
transferor’s basis carries over to the taxpayer.
RECOVERY OF BASIS the process by which a taxpayer recovers the basis
through distributions or payments with respect to the property.
STEP-UP BASIS the process by which a taxpayer’s basis is increased to a
certain level (usually fair market value) as of a certain date. Such a
basis is generally available for property received by an heir from a
decedent.
BASTARD an illegitimate child, one who is not born either in lawful
wedlock or within a competent time after its termination; also, a child of
a married person conceived with one other than the spouse. See bar
sinister.
BASTARDY PROCEEDING see paternity suit [bastardy proceeding].
BATTERY the unlawful touching of or use of force on another person
willfully or in anger. Battery may be considered either a tort, giving rise
to civil liability for damages to the victim, or a crime. Compare assault.
BATTERY, SEXUAL see rape.
BEARER the person in possession of an instrument, document of title, or
security payable to bearer or endorsed in blank. A note payable to
“bearer” is payable to any person who successively holds the note bona
fide, not by virtue of any assignment of promise, but by an original and
direct promise moving from the maker to the “bearer.”
BEARER BOND see bond [BEARER BOND].
BEARER PAPER commercial paper that is negotiable upon delivery by
any party or that does not designate a specific party by whom it is
negotiable. Such commercial paper is said to be PAYABLE TO BEARER.
The most popular domestic bearer instruments are government
securities, such as treasury bills and municipal bonds. Foreign stocks
and bonds are normally in bearer form. A major disadvantage of bearer
instruments is that they offer little protection in the event of theft or
loss.
EXAMPLE: A thief steals several notes that are payable to bearer and sells
them to Willie, who does not know they are stolen. Because the notes
are bearer paper, Willie can demand payment according to the terms of
the notes. The fact that they are stolen has no effect on his ability to
collect. Willie is the bearer. The notes are payable to whoever has
possession and is therefore the bearer.
See negotiable instrument. Compare order paper.
BEAR HUG a hostile takeover strategy wherein the suitor seeks to acquire
a company by making an offer at a premium price. This strategy is
designed to overcome resistance from the target’s board of directors
who are bound to act in the best interest of their shareholders.
BED AND BOARD see divorce.
BEFORE-THE-FACT see accessory [ACCESSORY BEFORE-THE-FACT].
BELIEF see information and belief. See also reasonable belief.
BENCH 1. the court; the judges composing the court collectively; 2. the
place where the trial judge sits. Compare bar.
BENCH TRIAL see trial [BENCH TRIAL].
BENCH WARRANT a court order for the arrest of a person; commonly
issued to compel a person’s attendance before the court to answer a
charge of contempt or if a witness or a defendant fails to attend after a
subpoena has been duly served.
EXAMPLE: Wendy was arrested for a traffic violation and ordered to
appear in court in two weeks. The order to appear notwithstanding,
Wendy continued with her vacation plans and found herself in another
state on the required date. As a result of her failure to appear, the court
ordered a bench warrant for Wendy. On the basis of that order she will
be arrested and brought before the court. The issuance of the warrant
also subjects Wendy to a penalty for contempt of court.
BEND SINISTER see bar sinister.
BENEFICIAL INTEREST the equitable interest in a trust held by the
beneficiary of the trust, as distinguished from the interest of the trustee
who holds legal title. Any person who under the terms of a trust
instrument has the right to the income or principal of the trust fund has
a beneficial interest in the trust.
BENEFICIAL USE a right to the use and enjoyment of property that exists
where legal title to that property is held by another, in trust.
BENEFICIARY 1. a person for whose benefit property is held in trust.
EXAMPLE: Curtis wants to insure that his two granddaughters, Lisa and
June, will have sufficient money to pursue a college education. In the
trust that Curtis establishes, the bank is named as trustee and Lisa and
June are named as beneficiaries. As trustee, the bank holds the money
until Lisa and June attend college, at which point the bank pays their
education costs. The bank holds the money for the benefit of Lisa and
June.
2. a person to whom another is in a fiduciary relation, whether the
relation is one of agency, trust, guardianship, partnership or
otherwise; 3. a person named to receive the proceeds or benefits of an
insurance policy; 4. a person named in a will to receive certain
property.
INCIDENTAL BENEFICIARY a person who may incidentally benefit from
the creation of a trust. Such a person has no actual interest in the trust
and cannot enforce any right to such incidental benefit.
BENEFIT for tax purposes, a benefit is received by a taxpayer whenever
anything occurs that results in an economic benefit to the taxpayer.
However, not all benefits are included in gross income since many
benefits are not realized in the taxable year or are not subject to tax
under the Internal Revenue Code or judicially or administratively
developed principles.
FRINGE BENEFITS benefits other than direct salary or compensation (such
as parking, health insurance, tuition reimbursement, etc.) received by
employees from employers as a result of their employment. Generally,
fringe benefits are not subject to tax.
BENEFIT OF CLERGY under Old English law, the right of clergymen to
avoid nonchurch trials. Also means solemnized by the church.
BENEFIT OF COUNSEL with an attorney’s advice. See right to counsel.
BENEFIT OF THE BARGAIN (RULE) method of measuring damages
in breach of contract or warranty cases or cases involving fraud or
misrepresentation. Calculated as the difference between the real value
and the represented or warranted value. Also known as LOSS OF
BARGAIN. See bargain. Compare out-of-pocket (rule).
BEQUEATH in a will, a gift of personal property, distinguishing it from
a devise, a gift of real property. The term disposition encompasses
both a bequest of personalty and a devise of realty.
BEQUEST a gift of personal property by will. A devise ordinarily passes
real estate, and a bequest passes personal property. See legacy.
CONDITIONAL BEQUEST a bequest that depends upon the occurrence or
nonoccurrence of a particular event.
EXECUTORY BEQUEST a bequest of personalty or money that does not
take effect until the happening of some future event, upon which it is
contingent.
RESIDUARY BEQUEST a bequest consisting of the remainder of an estate
after the payment of debts and of general legacies and other specific
gifts.
SPECIFIC BEQUEST A bequest of particular items, or of a part of a
testator’s estate that can be distinguished from all others of the same
kind, which may be satisfied only by delivery of the particular thing
(given by the will) and not merely by a corresponding amount in value
or similar property.
BERNE CONVENTION see copyright [BERNE CONVENTION].
BEST EVIDENCE RULE a rule of evidence requiring that the most
reliable evidence available be used. Thus, where the original of a
document is available, a copy will not be accepted as evidence.
BESTIALITY sexual intercourse with an animal. Bestiality constitutes a
crime against nature.
BEYOND A REASONABLE DOUBT see reasonable doubt.
B.F. bona fide or “approved.”
BFOQ see bona fide occupational qualification [BFOQ].
BFP see bona fide purchaser.
BIAS preconception; prejudice; taint; partiality. Since most persons have
various biases, the issue is whether the bias is such that impartiality
cannot be achieved and a fair outcome cannot occur. Any predisposition
that a judge or arbitrator may have may be grounds for recusal; any
predisposition that a witness may have may be grounds for
impeachment through cross-examination; any predisposition that a
juror may have may be grounds for excusal determined through a
process known as voir dire. Biases may exist for or against certain
religious, racial, ethnic, or minority groups and they may exist for or
against police officers, the very rich or the very poor, athletes, attorneys,
immigrants, and virtually any recognizable group of persons.
EXAMPLE: Nicholas, an avid Red Sox fan, is called as a juror in a medical
malpractice case. He agrees to set aside the fact that Dr. Kylie is an avid
Yankees fan and judge her strictly on her treatment of the patient.
BIAS CRIME commission of an offense where the person acted, at least in
part, with ill will, hatred, or bias toward, and with a purpose to
intimidate, an individual or group because of race, color, religion,
sexual orientation, or ethnicity. Offenses such as assult, harassment,
intimidation, or criminal mischief may have enhanced sentences
imposed upon the perpetrator if it is proved that the act was a bias
crime. Examples of hate or bias crimes include defacing a Jewish
cemetery with symbols of anti-Semitism; throwing rocks through the
windows of Chinese restaurants; or attacking persons believed to be
gay. The FBI collects statistics relating to such crimes.
BID an offer by an intending purchaser to buy goods or services at a stated
price, or an offer by an intending seller to sell his or her goods or
services for a stated price. Building contractors usually solicit bids
based on building specifications from several subcontractors in order to
complete a project. Government units are often required by law to
construct highways and buildings, and to buy goods and services,
through competitive bidding solicited by public advertisement, with the
lowest competent bid winning the contract. See also responsibility
[RESPONSIBLE BIDDERS].
BID SHOPPING the practice of a general contractor who, before the
award of the prime contract, discloses to interested subcontractors the
current low subbids on certain subcontracts in an effort to obtain lower
subbids.
BIGAMY the criminal offense of having two or more wives or husbands at
the same time. A bigamous marriage is void.
BILATERAL CONTRACT see contract [BILATERAL CONTRACT].
BILATERAL MISTAKE see mistake [MUTUAL [BILATERAL] MISTAKE].
BILL l. an order drawn by one person on another to pay a certain sum of
money; 2. in commercial law, an account for goods sold, services
rendered and work done; 3. in the law of negotiable instruments, any
form of paper money; 4. in legislation, a draft of a proposed statute
submitted to the legislature for enactment; 5. in equity pleadings, the
name of the pleading by which the complainant sets out his cause of
action.
BILL FOR A NEW TRIAL a bill submitted to a court of equity stating
equitable grounds for suspending execution of a judgment rendered in
a court of law and proposing a new suit in equity.
BILL OF ATTAINDER see bill of attainder.
BILL OF CERTIORARI a petition for writ of certiorari.
BILL OF DISCOVERY see discovery.
BILL OF EXCEPTIONS a writing submitted to a trial court stating for the
record objections to rulings made and instructions given by the trial
judge. See exceptions.
BILL OF EXCHANGE a written order directing another party to pay a
certain sum to a third party. See draft.
BILL OF INTERPLEADER see interpleader.
BILL OF LADING see bill of lading.
BILL OF PARTICULARS see bill of particulars.
BILL OF REVIEW a form of equitable proceeding brought to secure an
explanation, alteration or reversal of a final decree by the court that
rendered it, because of errors on the face of the record, or new evidence
or new matters that have appeared after entry of that decree.
BILL OF RIGHTS the first eight amendments to the United States
Constitution creating individual rights. Because they were adopted at
the same time, Amendments 9 and 10 are generally considered part of
the Bill of Rights. See Bill of Rights.
BILL OF SALE a written agreement under which title to personal chattels
is transferred.
CROSS BILL a pleading in a court of equity by the defendant against the
plaintiff or against another defendant in the suit; similar to
counterclaim and cross-claim at law.
TREASURY BILL a promissory note, having maturity of no longer than
one year, issued by the Treasury Department of the U.S. government.
See treasury bill.
BILL OF ATTAINDER a legislative act that applied either to individuals
or to members of a group in such a way as to pronounce sentence on
them without a trial. Such acts are prohibited by the Constitution
because they are, in effect, a legislative judgment of conviction without
a hearing. See attainder.
BILL OF EXCHANGE see bill; draft; exchange.
BILL OF LADING in commercial law, the receipt a carrier gives to a
shipper for goods given to the carrier for transportation. The bill
evidences the contract between the shipper and the carrier, and can also
serve as a document of title creating in the person possessing the bill
ownership of the goods shipped.
EXAMPLE: Jordan Ski Company agrees to ship goods to Peyton Sporting
World. When Jordan leaves the goods with Sydney Transport, the
transportation company, Sydney issues Jordan a bill of lading,
acknowledging receipt of the goods. The bill of lading specifies the
exact terms of the freight, its value, and delivery specifications, such as
the mode of transportation and any terms regarding damage.
ORDER BILL OF LADING a negotiable bill of lading that can be negotiated
like any other negotiable instrument, so that the shipper can sell it to
anyone, not just the intended recipient of the goods. The bill not only
states that the carrier is to deliver the goods to a specified person at a
specified place, but also requires the carrier to release the goods only
when the bill of lading is given him by the recipient. An order bill
operates as a document of title and must be presented by the recipient
before possession of goods will be delivered. Under this arrangement,
the shipper can withhold the bill of lading, and thus the goods
themselves, until the intended recipient pays for them.
STRAIGHT BILL OF LADING a nonnegotiable bill of lading, which merely
states that the carrier is to deliver the goods to a specified person at a
specified place.
BILL OF PARTICULARS a detailed statement provided in a criminal
case, as an amplification of the pleading to which it relates, in order to
advise the court, and, more particularly, the defendant, of the specific
facts or allegations he will be required to respond to.
BILL OF REVIEW form of equitable proceedings brought to secure an
explanation, alteration, or reversal of a final decree by the court that
rendered it. Most commonly, only errors of law appearing on the face of
the record, new evidence not susceptible to use at the trial and coming
to light after the decree is issued, and new matter arising after entry of
the decree, could have been the basis for a successful bill of review. It is
also appropriate where there is evidence of fraud impeaching the
original transaction.
BILL OF RIGHTS the first ten amendments to the United States
Constitution; that part of any constitution that sets forth the fundamental
rights of citizenship. It is a declaration of rights that are substantially
immune from government interference. See Fourteenth Amendment.
BIND something that obligates or constrains the bound individual. To
guaranty, to promise, to secure, to warrant, and to defend. A bind
places one under legal duties and obligations. One can “bind” oneself as
in a contract or one can be “bound” by a judgment.
BINDER 1. a written memorandum of the most important items of a
preliminary contract; 2. an insurer’s acknowledgment of its contract to
protect the insured against accidents of a specified kind until a formal
policy can be issued or until insurer gives notice of its election to
terminate.
BINDER RECEIPT a memorandum that serves as evidence of an approved
application for insurance and is intended to take the place of an
ordinary policy until the policy can be issued.
BINDING obligatory.
BINDING AGREEMENT a conclusive agreement.
BINDING ARBITRATION see arbitration [BINDING ARBITRATION].
BINDING INSTRUCTION an instruction that directs the jury how to
determine an issue in the case if certain conditions stated in that
instruction are shown to exist.
BIND OVER to order that a defendant be placed in custody pending the
outcome of a proceeding (usually criminal) against him or her. He or
she may thereafter be released on bail or on other conditions of release.
BITCOIN anonymous digital currency that is not tied to any government
and, unlike bank accounts, bitcoins are not insured by the FDIC.
Bitcoins are stored in a digital wallet, which exists either in the cloud or
on a user’s computer. The wallet is similar to a virtual bank account that
allows users to send or receive bitcoins peer to peer, without an
intermediary, to pay for goods or to save.
BLACKACRE a hypothetical piece of real estate used in teaching real
property or future interests courses in law school.
BLACK LETTER LAW see hornbook law.
BLACKMAIL the demanding of money either for performing an existing
duty, or for preventing an injury or for exercising an influence; the
extortion of things of value from a person by threats of personal injury,
or by threatening to accuse that person of crime or immoral conduct,
which, if true, would tend to disgrace him or her.
EXAMPLE: As a child, Evan had once been caught shoplifting. Now, Evan
occupies a position of high standing in the community and enjoys an
untarnished reputation. Tom wants Evan to lend him a considerable
amount of money. To persuade Evan to advance the loan, Tom
blackmails Evan by threatening to reveal the childhood incident, which
would discredit Evan. The criminal nature of Tom’s attempt to
blackmail is not affected by the truthfulness underlying the threat.
BLACKMAIL SUITS see strike suits.
BLANKET MORTGAGE [NOTE] see mortgage [BLANKET MORTGAGE
[NOTE].
BLANK INDORSEMENT see indorsement.
BLASPHEMY at common law, the misdemeanor of reviling or ridiculing
the established religion (Christianity) and the existence of God. See
establishment clause.
BLIND CERTIFICATE see digital certificate [BLIND CERTIFICATE].
BLIND TRUST see trust [BLIND TRUST].
BLOOD, CORRUPTION OF THE see corruption of blood.
BLUEBOOK see Uniform System of Citation [BLUE BOOK].
BLUE CHIP STOCK the common stock of a company known nationally
for the quality and wide acceptance of its products or services, and for
its ability to generate consistent profits and pay increased dividends.
The term probably evolved from its use in gambling casinos, where blue
chips are valued at $100, since common stocks of leading companies
were offered at $100 per share around the turn of the last century.
BLUE LAWS strict statutes or local ordinances most frequently enacted to
preserve observance of the Sabbath by prohibiting commercial activity
on Sundays.
EXAMPLE: In Ewing Township, local blue laws prevent a merchant from
selling automobile tires on Sunday but permit him to sell toothpaste and
soap. The difference is rationalized by the belief that selling tires
promotes working on a car instead of attending church. Toothpaste sales
will have no such effect.
With increasing frequency, blue laws are being abolished so that
people may freely choose activities without regard to societal notions as
to appropriate Sunday conduct.
BLUE RIBBON JURY see jury [BLUE RIBBON JURY].
BLUE SKY LAWS state laws regulating the sale of corporate securities
through investment companies, enacted to prevent the sale of securities
of fraudulent enterprises. See also Securities and Exchange
Commission [SEC].
BOARD OF DIRECTORS a group elected by shareholders to set
company policy and appoint the chief executives and operating officers.
BOARD ROOM a stockbroker’s office where registered representatives
(that is, securities salespersons registered with the SEC) work and
where the public is allowed to visit and obtain stock price quotations
throughout the market day. Offices are equipped with electronic
machines that provide information on trading in listed stocks, and overthe-counter markets and also provide business news.
BOILERPLATE 1. any standardized or preprinted form for agreements.
EXAMPLE: Scott is a rental agent and rents apartments for many landlords
throughout the city. Although both the apartments and the landlords’
requirements differ greatly, each rental agreement includes, in addition
to clauses related to each particular group of apartments, nineteen
boilerplate provisions covering liability of the various parties, damage
deposits, security arrangements and other matters common to such
agreement.
2. also, standardized language, as on a printed form containing the
terms of a lease or sales contract, often phrased to the advantage of the
party furnishing the form, with the expectation that the contract will be
signed without being carefully examined. See adhesion contract;
unconscionable.
BOILER ROOM [SHOP] a place devoted to high-pressure promotion by
telephone of stocks, bonds, diamonds, commodities, contracts, etc.,
which are of very questionable value. Extensive fraud is usually
involved, but successful prosecution may be difficult since operations
often disband before detection and since little tangible evidence is
obtainable.
BONA (bo@’-naW) Lat.: good, virtuous; also, goods, property.
BONA FIDE (bo@’-naW fῑd) Lat.: in good faith. Without fraud or deceit;
genuine.
BONA FIDE OCCUPATIONAL QUALIFICATION [BFOQ] statutory
provision that permits discriminatory practices in employment if a
person’s religion, sex, or national origin is a bona fide occupational
qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of that
particular business or enterprise. It is also permissible for an educational
institution with a particular religious orientation to hire only employees
of that religion. Courts have placed the burden of proof of establishing a
BFOQ on the defendant and the exception provided by the BFOQ has
been narrowly interpreted. In this manner it is more difficult to justify a
BFOQ than to defend against a constitutionally based claim of sex
discrimination under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment. The BFOQ exception would only be permitted if, in the
example of a woman working at a job requiring the frequent lifting of
substantial amounts of weights, the defendant proved by a
preponderance of the evidence that all or substantially all females would
be unable to perform safely and efficiently the duties involved in the
job. Sex has been found to be a BFOQ in terms of community standards
of morality where, for example, a man works as an attendant in a men’s
washroom and a woman works as a fitter in a lingerie establishment.
BONA FIDE PURCHASER [BFP] one who pays a valuable
consideration, has no notice of outstanding rights of others and acts in
good faith concerning the purchase. In commercial law, the phrase
holder in due course signifies the same thing. See buyer in ordinary
course of business.
EXAMPLE: George owns a textile mill and stores his products in a
warehouse. The owner of the warehouse sells several boxes of shirts to
Jerry without George’s permission. Jerry suspects no wrongdoing
because he has frequently dealt with the warehouse in a similar manner
without any trouble. Since George left the goods with the warehouse,
the subsequent sale to Jerry for value makes Jerry a bona fide purchaser
who is legally entitled to own the goods. Jerry even has superior claim
to the goods over George, so that in order to be compensated for his
loss, George must pursue his claim against the warehouse owner.
BOND evidence of a long-term debt that is legally guaranteed as to the
principal and interest specified on the face of the bond certificate. The
rights of the holder are specified in the bond indenture, which contains
the legal terms and conditions under which the bond was issued. Bond
debt is secured or guaranteed primarily by the ability of the issuer
(borrower) to pay the interest when due and to repay the principal at
maturity.
Bonds are available in two forms. REGISTERED BONDS are recorded on
the books of the issuer by the trustee, and interest is paid by mail to the
holder of record. BEARER BONDS are negotiable instruments that must
be safeguarded by the owner to prevent loss. Interest is paid by coupon
redemptions.
BOND DISCOUNT a reduction from the face amount of a bond that occurs
where bonds are sold on the market for cash at a price less than the face
amount. Since bonds mature (become due) years after issue, they are
discounted to reflect present value.
BONDED DEBT that part of the entire indebtedness of a corporation or
state that is represented by bonds it has issued; a debt contracted under
the obligation of a bond.
BOND FOR DEED [TITLE] a document given by the owner of real estate to
convey the property upon being paid money; an agreement to convey
title in the future that, so long as it remains executory (not yet
performed), allows title to remain vested in the original owner.
BOND FOR GENERAL PURPOSES government bonds that are a charge
against the taxpayers generally, as distinguished from bonds for
improvements, the cost of which is charged to the property specially
benefited.
BOND ISSUE the offering of bonds for sale to investors.
BOND PREMIUM the amount that the purchaser pays in buying a bond that
exceeds the face or call value of the bond.
BOND YIELD see yield.
PERFORMANCE BOND a contractor’s bond, guaranteeing that the
contractor will perform the contract and providing that, in the event of a
default, the surety may complete the contract or pay damages up to the
bond limit.
SERIAL [SERIES] BONDS bonds issued in a series by a public entity that
are payable at different times.
SURETY BOND a bond issued by one party, the surety, guaranteeing that
he or she will perform certain acts promised by another or pay a
stipulated sum, up to the bond limit, in lieu of performance, should the
principal fail to perform. In a criminal case, the surety bond assures the
appearance of the defendant or the repayment of bail forfeited upon the
defendant’s failure to appear in court.
BONDSMAN a surety; one who serves as security for another; a person
who obtains surety bonds for others for a fee; also, the individual who
arranges for the defendant in a criminal case to be released from jail by
posting a bail bond. Compare underwriter.
BONUS STOCK common stock offered as an additional incentive to
underwriters or buyers of a bond or preferred stock issue.
BOOK VALUE the value of individual assets, calculated as actual cost less
allowances for any amortization such as depreciation. It may be quite
different from market value, giving rise to hidden assets. Book value
on an overall balance sheet basis is net asset value; that is, total assets
less all liabilities. In reports to shareholders of publicly held
corporations, common shareholders’ per-share equity or book value is
obtained by dividing book value less any liquidation price for preferred
issues by the outstanding issue of common stock.
EXAMPLE: A corporation decides to close ten of its branch offices located
throughout the country. As part of the closing, it makes a deal with
another company to sell the buildings in which the offices were located.
The original cost of the buildings was $6 million, and their book value
has been reduced to $4 million through depreciation. The actual market
value is $8 million since in fact the buildings have appreciated in value.
Companies that invest in stock of other companies usually carry the
investment at its original cost as book value. The true market value may
be many times the cost if the stock has been held a long time.
BOOLEAN SEARCH basic method of locating information in a data
system such as LEXIS or WESTLAW by use of key words whose
relationships are expressed by the logical operators AND, OR, and
NOT. See search engine.
BOOT term referring to the taxable portion of a nontaxable exchange. The
general rule for nonrecognition tax treatment in a like-kind exchange
applies only to qualifying property exchanged solely for other
qualifying property. However, if an exchange that otherwise qualifies
for nonrecognition treatment includes the transfer of cash or non-likekind property (called “boot”), the transaction still qualifies for like-kind
exhange treatment, but is also partially nontaxable.
BORDELLO see prostitution [BORDELLO].
BOROUGH ENGLISH see primogeniture.
BOYCOTT to refrain from commercial dealing with someone by concerted
effort; to persuade someone to refrain from doing business with another.
SECONDARY BOYCOTT economic pressure by a union upon an employer
with whom the union has no dispute. By engaging in such activity, the
union hopes to compel that employer from ceasing to doing business
with the employer with which the union has its dispute. Secondary
boycotts are a violation of the Taft-Hartley Act.
EXAMPLE: An ironworker’s union has a dispute with Grayson Bridging.
The union puts pressure on Quinn Steel, the major supplier of steel to
Grayson, by stating it will call upon the public to boycott all of Quinn
Steel’s products in order to pressure Grayson into accepting the union’s
demands.
BRADY LAW the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act of 1993 is an
act of Congress that instituted background checks on the purchaser
before firearms may be purchased from a licensed dealer or
manufacturer. Intended to prevent persons with certain mental illnesses,
drug addictions, felony criminal records, misdemeanor domestic
violence convictions or restraining orders, dishonorable service
discharges, and noncitizens from purchasing firearms.
BRADY MATERIAL discovery which must be provided to the defense in
a criminal prosecution which is in the possession of the prosecution and
is favorable to the defendant and material to the question of guilt or to
punishment. The prosecution cannot withhold such information.
EXAMPLE: Davi has been charged in a series of home burglaries occurring
on the same residential street. Prior to Davi’s arrest, the police obtained
fingerprints from the broken window in one of homes that was
burglarized and determined that the prints belong to Jude, a person who
was never authorized to be in that home. Davi is entitled to the police
reports and fingerprint evidence in order to defend himself on the
charge of burglary of that particular home. Such exculpatory evidence
may also provide Davi with a defense to the remaining burglaries as
well.
BRAIN DEATH the irreversible cessation of brain function; statutory or
case law definitions of death are being expanded in many jurisdictions
to include this. Among the factors considered are the failure to respond
to external stimuli, the absence of breathing or spontaneous movement,
the absence of reflex movement, and a flat electroencephalograph
reading following a 24-hour observation period.
BREACH failure to perform some contracted-for or agreed-upon act, or to
comply with a legal duty owed to another or to society.
ANTICIPATORY BREACH see anticipatory breach.
BREACH OF CONTRACT a wrongful nonperformance of any contractual
duty of immediate performance; failing to perform acts promised, by
hindering or preventing such performance or by repudiating the duty to
perform.
BREACH OF PROMISE failure to fulfill a promise; often used as a short
form for breach of the promise of marriage.
BREACH OF THE PEACE conduct that destroys or menaces public order
and tranquillity, including violent acts or acts and words likely to
produce violence in others. In its broadest sense the term refers to any
criminal offense.
BREACH OF TRUST a trustee’s violation, whether willful and fraudulent,
or because of negligence, oversight or forgetfulness, of a duty that
equity places upon him or her.
BREACH OF WARRANTY infraction of an express or implied agreement as
to the title, quality, content or condition of a thing sold.
MATERIAL BREACH see material.
PARTIAL BREACH see partial breach.
BREAKING A CLOSE the common law trespass of unlawful entering
upon the land of another.
BREAKING AND ENTERING two of the elements necessary to
constitute a burglary, consisting of the use of physical force, however
slight, to remove an obstruction to an entrance. For example, pushing
open a door that is ajar, followed by unauthorized entry into a building,
is sufficient to constitute the breaking and entering elements of burglary.
BREAKING BULK refers to a doctrine whereby a bailee could be charged
with larceny by trespass if the person opened a chest, parcel, or case
containing goods entrusted to his or her care and converted some to his
or her own use; the trespass necessary for larceny was complete even if
the goods were not in a container but were themselves delivered in bulk
provided that the bailee separated only a portion of the goods entrusted
to him or her. If he or she converted all of the goods, there was,
however, no breaking bulk and hence no trespass and no larceny.
BREATHALYZER a chemical test of a person’s breath to determine
whether he or she is intoxicated, usually when the person is suspected of
drunken driving. The test is normally administered by a police officer
trained in the use of the equipment, and the equipment must be
calibrated on a regular basis. A person operating a motor vehicle is
usually presumed to have consented to taking the test, and refusal to
take the test may result in the automatic loss of one’s driver’s license.
The results of the test are admissible as evidence in court.
BRETHREN plural of brother, although its usage in wills can include
sisters. Reference used among Justices of the United States Supreme
Court to refer to fellow Justices. Since the appointment of female
Justices the term has fallen from usage or has been replaced with the
awkward “brethren/sistern.”
BRIBERY the voluntary giving of something of value to influence the
performance of an official duty.
EXAMPLE: Franco wants to build a shopping center in town, but for years
his requests for building permits have been turned down. Another
company is then granted the permits after one request. When Franco
inquires why that company is treated differently, he is informed that
they “make sure” their requests are granted. Franco understands that to
mean he needs to pay money to town council members. If Franco pays
the money, he is guilty of bribery even though payment is the only
means to secure permits.
COMMERCIAL BRIBERY includes the breach of duty by an employee in
accepting secret compensation from another in exchange for the
exercise of some discretion conferred upon the employee by his
employer, as in the approval of a contract.
BRICK AND MORTAR traditional business with a physical building
location for customers to interact on a face-to-face basis and having
rental and utility costs, in contrast to a business with Internet customers,
no physical presence, and thus lower operating costs.
BRIEF a written argument concentrating upon legal points and authorities
(i.e., precedents) used by the lawyer to convey to the court (trial or
appellate) the essential facts of his or her client’s case, a statement of
the questions of law involved, the law that should be applied and the
application that he or she desires made of that law by the court. The
brief is submitted in connection with an application, motion, trial or
appeal. Compare memorandum [MEMORANDUM OF LAW].
BROKER one who for a commission or fee brings parties together and
assists in negotiating contracts between them, a person whose business
it is to bring buyer and seller together.
BROTHEL see prostitution.
BROTHER-SISTER CORPORATION see corporation [BROTHERSISTER CORPORATION].
BRUTUM FULMEN (bru@’-tu*m fu*l’-me*n) Lat.: inert thunder. An empty
threat or charge, or a void judgment that is in legal effect no judgment
at all. A brutum fulmen is any potentially powerful and effective order,
document, decree or judgment that is powerless due to some
imperfection causing it to be unenforceable.
BUGGERY see sodomy.
BUGGING see wiretap.
BUILDING AND LOAN ASSOCIATION see bank [SAVINGS AND LOAN
ASSOCIATION].
BUILDING PERMIT see certificate of occupancy.
BULK SALES ACTS statutes designed to prevent the defrauding of
creditors by the secret sale in bulk of substantially all of a merchant’s
goods. These laws generally require that notice be given to creditors
before any sale of debtor’s goods. See bulk transfer.
BULK TRANSFER a type of commercial fraud in which a merchant (or
the owner of a business) transfers the business or a major part of it for
consideration and then fails to pay his creditors with the proceeds.
Any transfer in bulk of a major part of the materials, supplies,
merchandise or other inventory, not in the ordinary course of the
retailer’s business, is subject to the provisions of the Uniform
Commercial Code [UCC].
BUNCHING the concentration of gross income in one or more taxable
years. This results in adverse tax consequences because, under the
progressive tax rate structure, in the years that have the larger amount
of income there is a higher effective rate of tax. These adverse effects
are minimized by income averaging and by the preferential tax
treatment afforded to capital gains.
BURDEN anything that is grievous, wearisome or oppressive; in property
law, any restriction on the use of land, such as a zoning ordinance or
covenants running with the land.
BURDEN OF PROOF 1. the duty of a party to substantiate an allegation
or issue, either to avoid dismissal of that issue early in the trial or to
convince the court of the truth of that claim and hence to prevail in a
civil or criminal suit.
EXAMPLE: Jean files a lawsuit claiming that Don fraudulently induced her
to buy a vacuum cleaner. Don replies that he has never met Jean and
that he has never sold vacuum cleaners in Jean’s section of town. Jean
has a burden of proof to show facts that Don sold her a vacuum cleaner
and did so by fraudulent means.
2. the duty of a plaintiff, at the beginning of a trial, to make a prima
facie showing of each fact necessary to establish the existence of a
cause of action; referred to as the DUTY OF PRODUCING EVIDENCE (also
BURDEN OF EVIDENCE or PRODUCTION BURDEN). 3. the obligation to
plead each element of a cause of action or AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE (see
defense) or suffer a dismissal; referred to as the PLEADING BURDEN.
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS see Indian law [BUREAU OF INDIAN
AFFAIRS].
BURGLARY in common law, an actual breaking into a dwelling, at night,
with intent to commit a felony. Some statutes have expanded burglary to
include any unlawful entry into or remaining in a building or vehicle
with intent to commit a crime.
BUSINESS, COURSE OF see ordinary course of business.
BUSINESS CYCLE the periodic expansion and contraction of economic
activity. Economic researchers have identified three overlapping cycles
of approximately 4 years’, 10 to 20 years’, and 45 to 60 years’ duration.
Causes of the short-term cycles (average duration: 52 months, as
measured by the U.S. National Bureau of Economic Research) are
believed to be a combination of money expansion and contraction
(monetary theory), alternate savings and spending patterns of consumers
(consumer confidence theory), and alternate expansion and contraction
patterns of business inventory and business capital investment. It has
also been suggested that the attitudes and perceptions of consumers and
business managers guide their spending decisions and thus determine
the business cycle (psychological theory). The longer-term economic
cycles are dependent on more fundamental forces such as growth in
labor force and productivity, capital investments, technological
innovation, and long-term weather cycles.
BUSINESS EXPENSE see expense [TRADE OR BUSINESS EXPENSE].
BUSINESS GUEST see invitee.
BUSINESS INVITEE see invitee.
BUSINESS JUDGMENT RULE deference given by courts to the good
faith operations and transactions of a corporation by its executives.
Reasonable decisions, even if not the most profitable, will not be
disturbed by a court upon application by a disgruntled party such as a
stockholder. The rationale behind the rule is that stockholders accept
the risk that an informed business decision, honestly made and
rationally thought to be in the corporation’s best interests, may not be
second-guessed. Therefore, courts afford business judgments special
protection in order to limit litigation and avoid judicial intrusiveness in
private sector business decision making.
BUSINESS RECORDS EXCEPTION see hearsay rule [BUSINESS
RECORDS EXCEPTION].
BUSINESS TRUST see Massachusetts trust.
BUT FOR in tort and in criminal law, a test of whether an individual’s
action caused a particular event. The test is applied by asking whether
an accident or injury would have occurred “but for” (or in the absence
of) the individual’s act. See cause [PROXIMATE CAUSE]. See also causa
[CAUSA SINE QUA NON].
BUY AMERICAN ACT [PROVISION] federal legislation establishing
preference for the purchase of American-made supplies over foreignmade supplies. The Buy American provision in the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 provides that, unless one of three listed
exceptions applies (nonavailability, unreasonable cost, and inconsistent
with the public interest), and a waiver is granted, none of the funds
appropriated or otherwise made available by the act may be used for a
project for the construction, alteration, maintenance, or repair of a
public building or public work unless all the iron, steel, and
manufactured goods used are produced in the United States.
BUYDOWN advances made to a buyer by a home builder to reduce the
monthly mortgage payments as an inducement to purchase. May be for
a specified number of years or for the entire term of the loan.
BUYER IN ORDINARY COURSE OF BUSINESS a person who, in
good faith and without knowledge that the sale to him or her violates a
third party’s ownership rights or security interest in the goods, buys in
the usual manner from a person in the business of selling goods of that
kind. The buyer acquires the goods free of any security interest created
by the seller. See bona fide purchaser; holder in due course.
EXAMPLE: Rich, a truck driver, fraudulently obtains a truckload of
computer parts from a manufacturing company and sells them to a parts
supplier. Unless the supplier frequently buys large amounts of new parts
from truck drivers, the supplier cannot be a buyer in the ordinary course
of business and therefore cannot claim ownership of the parts over the
manufacturing company. If the supplier had bought the parts from a
normal dealer in computer parts, the supplier would have ownership
rights superior to the manufacturing company. The buyer should have
suspected that the truck driver was not in legitimate possession of the
goods. In purchasing goods from him, the buyer assumed the risk that
the truck driver might later be exposed as a thief.
BUY-SELL AGREEMENT an arrangement entered into between owners
of a business providing for the disposition of the respective interest of
each in the event one or more owners withdraws from the business at
some future time. Under such an agreement, the withdrawing owner
agrees to sell, and the remaining owner(s) agree to buy, his or her
proportionate share of the business upon his or her departure for a
predetermined price, fixed, either as to the amount or the method of
computing that amount, at the time the agreement is entered into.
BYLAWS rules adopted for the regulation of an association’s or
corporation’s own actions. In corporation law, bylaws are self-imposed
rules that constitute an agreement or contract between a corporation and
its members to conduct the corporate business in a particular way. In the
absence of law to the contrary, under common law the power to make
bylaws resides in the members or shareholders of the corporation.
When used by corporations, the term bylaws deals with matters of
corporate structure and machinery as distinguished from regulations,
which are imposed by a board of directors to deal with problems
relating to the day-to-day management.
BY OPERATION OF LAW see operation of law.
BY THE ENTIRETY see tenancy [TENANCY BY THE ENTIRETY].
C
C Lat.: abbreviation for the Latin “cum” meaning “with.”
CAB see Civil Aeronautics Board [CAB].
CADAVER the body of a deceased person.
CALENDAR (CALL) a hearing in court in a pending cause to ascertain
the status of the matter and to establish a date for trial.
CALENDAR YEAR see fiscal year [CALENDAR YEAR].
CALL 1. a demand by a corporation on a shareholder to pay an
additional sum to the corporation proportionate to his or her share of
stock; also, an obligation of a corporation to issue stock at a certain
price on demand, in which case the privilege of calling for the stock
belongs to the buyer; 2. in property law, an identifiable natural object
designated in a deed or other instrument of conveyance as a landmark,
to mark the boundary of the land conveyed.
CALLABLE BOND a bond that the issuer may retire at any time before its
maturity. Usually the issuer must pay a premium (an amount more than
the face value of the bond) to call the bond.
CALL OPTION see stock option [CALL OPTION].
CALUMNY slander, defamation; false prosecution or accusation.
CAMERA see in camera.
CANNABIS see controlled substances [CANNABIS].
CANON 1. a rule of ecclesiastical law, primarily concerning the clergy, but
also at times embracing lay members of a congregation. 2. a rule of
construction. One of a body of rules to guide the interpretation of
statutes, ordinances, etc. A PROFESSIONAL CANON is a rule or standard of
conduct adopted by a professional group to guide the professional
conduct of its members.
CAPACITY mental ability to make a rational decision, which includes the
ability to perceive and appreciate all relevant facts. Capacity is not
necessarily synonymous with sanity. No one can be guilty of a crime
who lacks the legal capacity to commit it. To render a contract binding,
the parties involved must have the capacity to contract. Testamentary
capacity with respect to personalty is governed by the law of the
testator’s domicile, and, with respect to realty, by the law of the place
where the realty is situated. The objection of “lack of capacity to sue”
refers to a general legal disability to maintain the action.
CAPACITY TO SUE see legal capacity to sue.
CAPIAS (ka@’-pe@-a*s) Lat.: that you take. In common law, a writ executed
by seizing either the property or the person of the defendant to compel
his answering a particular charge in court. The term describes several
types of judicial writs or process, by which actions in a court of law
were commenced. The writs have been largely replaced by service of
process.
CAPIAS AD AUDIENDUM JUDICIUM (a*d ô-de@-e*n’-du*m ju@-du*’-she@-u*m) Lat.:
that you take to hear judgment. A writ to bring to court a defendant who
has appeared and been found guilty of a misdemeanor, to receive the
court’s judgment.
CAPIAS AD RESPONDENDUM (a*d re*s-po*n-de*n’-du*m) Lat.: that you take to
answer. A writ directing the arrest and production of a defendant before
judgment. It not only notifies a defendant to defend suit, like a
summons, but also enables his or her arrest as security for the
plaintiff’s claim.
CAPIAS AD SATISFACIENDUM (a*d sä-tĭs-fä-she@-e*n’-du*m) Lat.: that you
take to satisfy. A writ for the arrest of a judgment debtor until the debt
claim is satisfied. See service of process.
CAPITA see per capita.
CAPITAL the money and other property of a corporation or other
enterprise used in transacting its business. Compare capitalization.
CAPITAL ACCOUNTS that part of a business’s accounting records where
capital assets and expenditures, and the liabilities incurred to acquire
such assets and make such expenditures, are taken into account. The
capital account usually consists of CAPITAL ASSETS [below] and capital
liabilities, such as long-term debt, and stock and other equity
ownership.
CAPITAL ASSETS property with a relatively long life, or the fixed assets
in a trade or business. In U.S. tax law, the term refers to property held
for investment by the taxpayer that when sold is subject to special tax
treatment (as capital gains and losses). Property that is part of one’s
stock in trade does not qualify as a capital asset.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE expenditure made for the acquisition, repair or
improvement of a capital asset. Compare expenses.
EXAMPLE: Aerospace Corporation, a thriving industry, wants to expand
its production capabilities to meet the increase in demand for its
products. Its minimum needs are two new plants and four new office
buildings in various parts of the country. Regardless of where
Aerospace obtains the money for the new construction, whether from a
bank or from profits the corporation has retained, the money spent to
acquire these buildings represents a capital expenditure.
CAPITAL GAINS OR LOSSES gains or losses realized from the sale or
exchange of CAPITAL ASSETS, calculated as the difference between the
amount realized on the sale or exchange and the taxpayer’s basis in the
assets.
CAPITAL INTENSIVE an industry or economic sector that requires a large
amount of machinery, equipment, and so on, relative to the quantity of
labor or land required. The energy industries—oil production and
refining, coal mining, and electric power generation—require large
amounts of capital equipment per unit of output. Historically, coal
mining was a labor intensive industry requiring a large labor force to dig
the product using hand tools. This is no longer the case, however, as
modern strip-mining machinery can dig more coal per hour than 50
miners using hand tools could dig in a shift.
CAPITAL INVESTMENT money paid out to acquire something for
permanent use or value in a business or home; also, moneys paid out for
an interest in a business, as in a stock purchase.
CAPITAL MARKET the organized buying and selling of long-term fixedincome securities such as bonds or mortgages, proceeds from the sale
of which are used to finance CAPITAL EXPENDITURES. In contrast to the
capital market, the money market is used to raise short-term funds and
the EQUITY MARKET (see equity) is used to obtain permanent capital
through the sale of stock.
CAPITAL STOCK the amount of money or property contributed by
shareholders to be used as the financial foundation for the
corporation. The total of a corporation’s capital stock is divided into
shares.
CAPITAL SURPLUS see surplus [CAPITAL SURPLUS].
LONG-TERM CAPITAL GAINS OR LOSSES are capital gains or losses from
the sale or exchange of capital assets held for the required holding
period. The net long-term capital gain or loss for the year is combined
with the net short-term capital gain or loss for the year to arrive at an
overall (net) capital gain or loss. If capital gains exceed capital losses,
the overall gain is included with the taxpayer’s other income but is
subject to a maximum tax rate of 28% for individuals and 35% for
corporations. If capital losses exceed capital gains, the overall losses are
subject to deduction limitations, generally $3,000 per year for
noncorporate taxpayers.
In order to encourage the flow of capital to small businesses, the 1993
Revenue Act permits noncorporate taxpayers to exclude 50% of any
gain realized on the sale or exchange of “qualified small business stock”
(“QSBS”) held for more than 5 years, subject to certain limitations and
special rules. SHORT-TERM CAPITAL GAINS OR LOSSES are gains or losses
from the sale or exchange of capital assets held for a period shorter than
the required holding period.
§1231 PROPERTY depreciable business property, business real property,
and certain other types of property are §1231 property. These assets
produce long-term capital gain and ordinary loss.
CAPITAL ACCOUNT the group of accounting records that involves
transactions in the equity or ownership of the business.
CAPITAL ASSETS see capital [CAPITAL ASSETS].
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE see capital [CAPITAL EXPENDITURE].
CAPITAL GAINS OR LOSSES gains or losses realized from the sale or
exchange of CAPITAL ASSETS (see capital) and calculated as the
difference between the amount realized on the sale or exchange and the
taxpayer’s basis in the assets.
LONG-TERM CAPITAL GAIN OR LOSS a capital gain or loss from the sale or
exchange of capital assets held for the required holding period
(generally, one year for the taxable years beginning after 1977).
SHORT-TERM CAPITAL GAIN OR LOSS a gain or loss from the sale or
exchange of capital assets held for a period shorter than the required
holding period.
CAPITAL INTENSIVE an industry or economic sector that requires a
large amount of machinery, equipment, etc., relative to the quantity of
labor or land required. The energy industries—oil production and
refining, coal mining and electric power generation—require large
amounts of capital equipment per unit of output. Historically, coal
mining was a labor intensive industry requiring a large labor force to dig
the product using hand tools. Today, however, this is no longer the case,
as modern strip-mining machinery can dig more coal per hour than fifty
miners using hand tools could dig in a shift.
CAPITAL INVESTMENT see capital [CAPITAL INVESTMENT].
CAPITALIZATION 1. for accounting purposes, the process of converting
expected earnings or an expense item into an asset; 2. the total of longterm capital, such as long-term loans and notes, bonds, mortgages, and
stock, used by a business to purchase assets.
CAPITALIZED VALUE the current worth of money expected to be
earned or received in the future, calculated by using an appropriate
discount rate to accurately express current value.
CAPITAL MARKET the organized buying and selling of long-term fixedincome securities such as bonds or mortgages, proceeds from the sale
of which are used to finance capital expenditures. In contrast to the
capital market, the money market is used to raise short-term funds and
the EQUITY MARKET (see equity) is used to obtain permanent capital
through the sale of stock.
CAPITAL OFFENSE a criminal offense punishable by death, for which
bail is generally unavailable to the defendant.
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT imposition of the death penalty.
CAPITAL STOCK see capital [CAPITAL STOCK].
CAPITAL SURPLUS see surplus [CAPITAL SURPLUS].
CAPITE see in capite.
CAPTION 1. the heading of a legal document containing the names of the
parties, the court, the index or docket number of the case, etc.; 2. the
act of seizing, which, together with ASPORTATION (the act of carrying
away), was a necessary element of common law larceny.
CAPTURE acquiring ownership where no prior ownership existed, as with
wild animals, mining, and water. Also refers to taking by a military
group.
CARBON FOOTPRINT calculation of the negative impact on the
environment by the fuel consumption choices of a person or business,
measured in terms of carbon dioxide emissions or greenhouse gases.
CARE attention, charge, or management implying responsibility for safety;
also custody, temporary charge. In the law of negligence, the care
owned by a defendant to those who may be injured by his or her
actions is measured by the risks that those actions create. Occasionally,
statutes fix the duty of care owed and an unexplained violation of that
statutory standard renders the defendant negligent as a matter of law.
Generally, degrees of care set a relative standard by which conduct is
tested to determine whether it constitutes negligence. See due care;
duty [DUTY OF CARE]; See also utmost care.
GREAT CARE degree of care usually exercised in similar circumstances
by the most competent, prudent, and careful class of persons engaged in
similar conduct. Care greater than that usually bestowed by persons of
ordinary prudence in similar circumstances. For example, the great care
expected of an airplane pilot is the care that would be exercised by the
most competent, conscientious, prudent, and careful pilot in similar
circumstances.
ORDINARY CARE reasonable diligence and exercise of good judgment;
care a reasonably careful person would use under similar circumstances.
REASONABLE CARE degree of care that, under the circumstances, would
usually be exercised by or might be reasonably expected from an
ordinary, prudent person. Often viewed as the only true measure of care.
Reasonable care is synonymous with ordinary and due care.
SLIGHT CARE such as persons of ordinary prudence usually exercise
about their own affairs of slight importance. Includes such care as
careless or inattentive persons usually exercise.
CAREGIVER STRESS the strain of long-term care for another person
with physical or mental needs. The caregiver may suffer a toll on his or
her physical, emotional, or financial health from providing care such as
cooking, bathing, and feeding the person in need.
CA. RESP. see capias [CAPIAS AD RESPONDENDUM].
CARJACKING see hijacking [CARJACKING].
CARNAL KNOWLEDGE sexual intercourse; the slightest penetration of
the female sexual organ by the male sexual organ; does not require
rupture of the hymen. Known as “statutory rape” when conducted with
a child under the age of consent. See rape.
CARRIER [COMMON CARRIER] one who is in the business of
transporting goods or persons for hire, as a public utility. A private
carrier, in contrast, is not in the business of transporting as public
employment, but hires out to deliver goods in particular cases.
CARRYBACK a process by which the deductions or credits of one
taxable year that cannot be used to reduce tax liability in that year are
applied against tax liability in an earlier year or years. Carrybacks are
available, for example, with respect to operating losses of businesses,
charitable deductions and investment tax credits. Compare carryover.
CARRYOVER a process by which the deductions and credits of one
taxable year that cannot be used to reduce tax liability in that year are
applied against tax liability in subsequent years. Compare carryback.
CARRYOVER BASIS see basis [CARRYOVER OR SUBSTITUTED BASIS].
CARTEL a group of independent industrial corporations, usually
operating internationally, which agree to restrict trade to their mutual
benefit.
CARVE OUT the process by which a taxpayer separates the present
income stream of property from the property itself. For example, if an
owner of mineral property sells for a certain number of years a portion
of the future mineral production from such property, the sale of such
future production is a “carved out” interest in the mineral property.
CA. SA. see capias [CAPIAS AD SATISFACIENDUM].
CASE an action, cause, suit, or controversy, at law or in equity. ACTION
IN CASE see trespass [TRESPASS ON THE CASE].
PRIMA FACIE CASE see prima facie case.
CASE AT BAR see bar [CASE AT BAR].
CASE LAW see common law. Compare statutory law.
CASE OF FIRST IMPRESSION see first impression.
CASE, ON THE see trespass [TRESPASS ON THE CASE].
CASE OR CONTROVERSY see controversy [CASE OR CONTROVERSY].
CASE REPORTS see advance sheets; reports.
CASH EQUIVALENT DOCTRINE see income [CASH EQUIVALENT
DOCTRINE].
CASHIER’S CHECK see check [CASHIER’S CHECK].
CASH METHOD see accounting method [CASH METHOD].
CASH SALE if a contract for the sale of goods does not specify the
manner of payment, the law requires that the purchase price be paid in
cash. Under the CASH SALE DOCTRINE a seller who sells to a middleman
under “cash sale” terms has priority over other secured creditors to that
middleman’s assets if he or she goes bankrupt.
CASH SURRENDER VALUE the amount the insurance company will
pay on a given life insurance policy if the policy is canceled prior to the
death of the insured.
CASH VALUE see market value. Compare book value.
CASUALTY LOSS a loss of property due to fire, storm, shipwreck or
other casualty, which is allowable as a deduction in computing
TAXABLE INCOME (see income). For a loss to qualify as a casualty loss it
must be due to a sudden, unexpected or unusual event. Thus, while
property damage due to a storm would normally qualify as a casualty
loss, gradual erosion by wind or water would not.
CAUSA (käw’-zaW) Lat.: cause, motive, reason. A lawsuit or case.
CAUSA MORTIS (môr’-tĭs) Lat.: in anticipation of approaching death.
CAUSA PROXIMA (pro*k’-sĭ-maW) Lat.: proximate cause; most closely
related cause. A cause sufficiently related to the result to justify
imposing legal liability on the actor who produces the cause. See cause
[PROXIMATE CAUSE]; see also cause [DIRECT CAUSE].
CAUSA SINE QUA NON (se’-naW kwä no*n) Lat.: a cause without which it
would not have occurred. Used most often in connection with the “but
for” test of causation. See cause.
CAUSE that which effects a result.
DIRECT CAUSE the active cause that sets in motion a chain of events that
brings about a result without the intervention of any other source; often
used interchangeably with PROXIMATE CAUSE.
IMMEDIATE CAUSE the nearest cause in time and space.
INTERVENING [SUPERVENING] CAUSE the cause that actively produces the
result after the negligence or breach or culpable act of the defendant.
PROXIMATE CAUSE that which in natural and continuous sequence,
unbroken by any new independent cause, produces an event, and
without which the injury would not have occurred.
REMOTE CAUSE that which does not necessarily produce an event
without which injury would not occur. Thus, a cause which is not
considered to be “proximate” will be regarded as “remote.”
SUPERSEDING CAUSE an intervening cause so substantially responsible
for the ultimate injury that it cuts off the liability of preceding actors
regardless of whether their prior negligence was a substantial factor in
bringing about the injury.
EXAMPLE: Danita pulls into a gasoline station and asks the attendant to
fill up her car. In the process, the attendant accidentally squeezes the
handle, and gas spills on the pavement, something that is not
uncommon. Sal, who is near the car and is unaware of what happened,
lights a cigarette and tosses the match in the puddle of gas. Danita’s car
is destroyed. Courts would find that, although the attendant may have
been negligent in spilling gasoline, Sal’s action is the superseding cause
of the fire. The gas on the pavement would not have created a problem
had Sal never lighted a cigarette near the pumps.
SUPERVENING CAUSE see INTERVENING CAUSE.
CAUSE OF ACTION a claim in law and fact sufficient to form the basis
of a valid lawsuit, as a BREACH OF CONTRACT. A RIGHT OF ACTION is the
legal right to sue; a cause of action is the composite of facts that gives
rise to a right of action.
CAUTIONARY INSTRUCTION that part of a judge’s charge
(instruction) to a jury telling them not to allow any extraneous or
outside matter to influence their verdict, not to consider certain rulings
of the court as an intimation of opinion, and not to discuss their
deliberation process with anyone. The giving of cautionary instructions
is within the discretion of the court and is not improper if it does not
prejudice either party, but there is authority holding that such
instructions should not be given if unnecessary.
CAVEAT (kä’-ve@-ât) Lat.: let him beware. l. A warning or caution; a
suggestion to a judicial officer that he or she ought to take care how he
or she acts in a particular matter and should suspend the proceeding
until the merits of the issue thus raised (the caveat) are determined; 2.
an in rem proceeding attacking the validity of an instrument
purporting to be a will, or a remedy given to prevent a patent from
being issued in cases where the directions of the law have been violated.
CAVEAT EMPTOR (kä’-ve@-ät e*mp’-to*r) Lat.: let the buyer beware. This
phrase expresses the rule of law that the purchaser buys at his or her
own risk.
CBP see Customs and Border Protection [CBP].
CD see certificate of deposit.
CEASE AND DESIST ORDER an order of a court or other body having
judicial authority prohibiting the person or entity to which it is directed
from undertaking or continuing a particular activity or course of
conduct. Such an order may be issued upon a showing, to a degree of
certainty or probability, that the conduct is unlawful or likely to be
found unlawful.
EXAMPLE: Timber Company had received permission from the Interior
Department to cut wood in a section of one of California’s giant
redwood forests. Several environmental groups brought a court action to
stop Timber, claiming that any lumbering activities in the forests would
violate the express purpose of Congress in establishing the forests and
would result in irreparable harm. The court agreed and issued a cease
and desist order requiring Timber to stop cutting wood.
CELL PARDE see sentence [CELL PAROLE].
CENSURE 1. a reproach or reprimand, especially when delivered by a
judicial or other official body; 2. the act of pronouncing such a reproach
or reprimand.
CENTER OF GRAVITY see conflict of laws.
CERT. see certiorari.
CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT [CD] an acknowledgment by a bank of
receipt of money with an agreement to repay within a specified time.
CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION similar to articles of
incorporation. In some states the certificate is issued by a state agency
after the articles of incorporation have been properly filed; the
corporation’s existence begins upon the issuance of the certificate.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY [CO] a document by a local
government agency signifying that a building or dwelling conforms to
local building code regulations. Generally, entry or transfer of title
requires a valid certificate of occupancy.
CERTIFICATE OF TITLE a document indicating ownership, similar to a
BILL OF SALE (see bill) and usually associated with the sale of new
motor vehicles.
CERTIFICATION see certiorari.
CERTIFIED CHECK see check.
CERTIFIED LEGAL ASSISTANT see National Association of Legal
Assistants [CLA].
CERTIORARI (seWr-she@-ô-rä’-re@) Lat.: to be informed of. A means of
gaining appellate review; a common law writ, issued by a superior
court to a lower court, commanding the latter to certify and return to the
former a particular case record so that the higher court may inspect the
proceedings for irregularities or errors.
CESTUI QUE (se*s’-tĭ ka@or se*s’-twe@ka@; pl.: CESTUIS QUE) Old Fr.: the
one who; the person who. Used only in the following phrases:
CESTUI QUE TRUST (tru*st) Old Fr.: the one who trusts. The beneficiary.
See trust.
CESTUI QUE USE (u@z) Old Fr.: the one who has the use. The person for
whose use the property is held by another. Cestui que use enjoys the
equitable and beneficial rights to the profits and income of the estate,
while the legal title and obligations remain in the trustee.
CESTUI QUE VIE (ve@) Old Fr.: the one who lives. The person by whose
life the duration of an estate is measured.
CF. abbreviation for the Latin word confer meaning “compare.”
CFI see CIF
C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
CFTC see Commodity Futures Trading Commission [CFTC].
CHAIN OF TITLE the succession of conveyances of title to property,
commencing with the patent from the government (or other original
source) down to and including the conveyance to the pres-ent holder.
The recorded chain of title consists only of the documents affecting
title that have been recorded in a manner that makes their existence
readily discoverable by a bona fide purchaser. Of the two systems for
recording such documents, the TRACT INDEX records in the same place
all instruments relating to a particular property, while the GRANTORGRANTEE INDEX indexes all such instruments under the names of the
various grantors or grantees of the property. See recording acts; title
search.
CHALLENGE in general, to call one out to answer for something; an
objection or exception calling into question the existence of a right, the
validity or sufficiency of an instrument, or the capability of a person for
a specific function. Also, an objection by a party (or lawyer) to the
inclusion of a particular prospective juror as a member of the jury that is
to hear that party’s cause or trial, with the result that the prospective
juror is disqualified from the case. See voir dire.
CHALLENGE FOR CAUSE a challenge based upon a particular reason (such
as bias) specified by law or procedure as a reason that a party (or his
lawyer) may use to disqualify a prospective juror.
CHALLENGE TO JURY ARRAY a formal objection to the entire panel of
grand or petit jurors. The basis of such a challenge is that something has
been done or omitted to the prejudice of the substantial rights of the
challenging party.
GENERAL CHALLENGE a type of challenge for cause based on grounds
from which, if shown to exist, the disqualification of the juror follows
as a legal conclusion. Known as a CHALLENGE FOR PRINCIPAL CAUSE at
common law.
PEREMPTORY CHALLENGE a right given to attorneys at trial to dismiss a
prospective juror for no particular reason; the number of times an
attorney can invoke this right is usually limited. If a specific reason
exists why a particular juror may not fairly decide a matter, the juror
may be CHALLENGED FOR CAUSE. This conserves the peremptory
challenges. Even the government can use these challenges.
CHAMBERS see in camera.
CHAMPERTY in common law, an unlawful agreement between an
attorney and his or her client that the attorney will sue and pay the costs
of the client’s suit in return for a portion of the damages rewarded.
Today the prohibition against champerty survives only in a few
jurisdictions and only in modified form. See also criminal
maintenance. Compare barratry.
CHANCELLOR 1. in early English law, the King’s minister who would
dispense justice in the King’s name by extraordinary equitable relief
where the remedy at law was inadequate; later, the name of the chief
judge of the court of chancery; 2. in American law, a judge in a court of
chancery.
CHANCERY the jurisprudence that is exercised in a court of equity;
synonymous with equity or equitable jurisdiction.
CHAPTER 11 see bankruptcy [CHAPTER 11 REORGANIZATION].
CHARACTER WITNESS see witness.
CHARGE l. in criminal law, a description of the underlying offense in an
accusation or indictment; 2. in trial practice, an address delivered by
the court to the jury at the close of the case, telling them the principles
of law they are to apply in reaching a decision.
EXAMPLE: At the end of the trial for assault and robbery, the judge
charged the jury with (i.e., explained to them) the necessary elements of
law that must be proved in order to convict the defendant. As in all
criminal trials, the judge also charged the jury that they are the sole
deciders (triers) of fact and should not be influenced by impressions
from the judge or any attorney. Finally, the jurors were instructed to
apply the law only as charged by the judge and not to base their decision
on their own conception of the law.
The charge may also include instructions given during the trial for the
jury’s guidance.
See also complaint.
CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTION a contribution for the use of a state,
the United States, or a corporation organized and operated exclusively
for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, educational, or like
purposes. Charitable contributions are deductible under the federal
income tax laws.
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION donations to political candidates, parties, and
newsletter funds.
CHARITABLE DEDUCTION see charitable contribution.
CHARITY a nonprofit institution organized and operated exclusively for
charitable, religious, scientific, literary, educational or like purposes,
whose income is exempt from federal income tax. Contributions to such
organizations are allowable, with limitations, as a deduction in
computing one’s TAXABLE INCOME (see income).
PRIVATE FOUNDATIONS organizations that, although charities, are deemed
to receive a substantial portion of their support from nonpublic sources,
usually from small groups of individuals. A private foundation is
subject to additional restrictions on its activities and its financial
dealings, including accumulation of income.
PUBLIC CHARITY a charity that, under certain tests, is deemed to receive
the major portion of its support from the public rather than from a small
group of individuals.
CHARTER a document issued by the government establishing a corporate
entity. See articles of incorporation; certificate of incorporation.
CHATTEL any tangible, movable thing; personal property as opposed to
real property; goods.
CHATTEL MORTGAGE a mortgage on personal property created to
secure the payment of moneys owed or the performance of some other
obligation. This security device has for the most part been replaced by
the security agreements available under the Uniform Commercial
Code.
CHATTEL PAPER a document that shows both a debt and a security
interest in or a lease of specific goods.
CHECK a draft upon a bank, payable on demand, and by the maker or
drawer, containing a promise to pay an amount of money to the payee.
Compare bad check; NSF [nonsufficient funds] check; raised check.
CASHIER’S CHECK a check issued by an officer of a bank to another
person, authorizing the payee to receive upon demand the amount of the
check. It is drawn on the bank’s own account, not that of a private
person, and is therefore accepted for many transactions where a
personal check would not be.
CERTIFIED CHECK a check containing a certification that the drawer of
the check has sufficient funds in the bank to cover payment.
MEMORANDUM CHECK a bank check with the word “memorandum”
written across its face, which is not intended for immediate
presentation, but simply as evidence of an indebtedness by the drawer
to the holder.
CHECK KITING an illegal scheme that establishes a false line of credit
by the exchange of worthless checks between two banks. For instance, a
check kiter might have empty checking accounts at two different banks,
A and B. The kiter writes a check for $50,000 on the Bank A account
and deposits it in the Bank B account. If the kiter has good credit at
Bank B, he will be able to draw funds against the deposited check
before it clears (i.e., is forwarded to Bank A for payment and paid by
Bank A.) Since the clearing process usually takes a few days, the kiter
can use the $50,000 for a few days, and then deposit it in the Bank A
account before the $50,000 check drawn on that account clears.
CHECKS AND BALANCES see separation of power.
CHIEF JUSTICE the presiding member of certain courts with more than
one judge; especially, the presiding member of the U.S. Supreme Court,
who is the principal administrative officer of the federal judiciary.
CHILD AND DEPENDENT CARE CREDIT a tax credit allowed for 20
percent of the expenses incurred for household services or for care of a
child or other dependent where a taxpayer maintains a household that
includes one or more dependents who are under 15 years of age or
mentally or physically incapacitated.
CHILD CITIZENSHIP ACT see citizen [CHILD CITIZENSHIP ACT].
CHILD CUSTODY see custody of children.
CHILD PORNOGRAPHY see obscene material; sexual exploitation.
CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE ACCOMMODATION SYNDROME
[CSAAS] a pattern of behavior that is found to occur in children who
are victims of sexual abuse. The behavior is often contrary to basic adult
assumptions and thus courts may allow expert testimony on CSAAS to
establish that a victim’s symptoms are consistent with sexual abuse and
to explain a delay in reporting abuse or recanting allegations of abuse.
CSAAS consists mainly of five parts. The first is secrecy. Most people
would expect that a child would tell if they had been sexually assaulted
but statistically they rarely tell. Usually the child will keep it a secret.
The other parts are helplessness; entrapment or accommodation;
delayed, conflicted or unconvincing disclosure; and retraction or
recantation. See rape.
CHILD SUPPORT see alimony [CHILD SUPPORT].
CHILL [CHILLING EFFECT] limitations on the exercise of First
Amendment rights imposed not by law but by individuals who, fearful
of the possible application of laws and sanctions, choose not to exercise
their legitimate rights rather than risk prosecution.
EXAMPLE: A protest group schedules a weekend march to show support
for that group’s position. Even though the group has a permit, word is
spread that the police plan to use tear gas and arrest marchers. The
rumor has a chilling effect and keeps some people home who would
otherwise have joined the protest.
CHOATE (ko@’-a@t) completed or perfected; a right in regard to which no
additional events need occur for it to be operative. Compare inchoate.
CHOICE OF LAW see conflict of law [CHOICE OF LAW].
CHOSE (sho@z) Fr.: a thing.
CHOSE IN ACTION a claim or debt upon which recovery may be made in
a lawsuit; not a present possession, but merely a right to sue, becoming
a possessary thing only upon successful completion of a lawsuit.
CHOSE IN POSSESSION a thing actually possessed or possessable.
CHURNING excessive trading in a stock investment account. If the pattern
of activity is inappropriate for the customer and if the prime result is
excessive brokerage commissions for the registered representative,
then the practice is unethical and recovery of damages by the customer
is possible.
CIF cost, insurance and freight; also written CFI In a contract of sale it
means that the cost of the goods, the insurance and the freight to the
destination is included in the contract price, and unless there is
something in a CFI contract to indicate to the contrary, the seller
completes the contract when he or she delivers the merchandise to the
shipper, pays the freight to point of destination and forwards to the
buyer the bill of lading, invoice, insurance policy and receipt showing
payment of freight.
CIMT abbreviation for “crime involving moral turpitude.”
CIR. CT. abbreviation for Circuit Court.
CIRCUIT judicial divisions of a state or the United States; originally so
called because judges traveled from place to place within the circuit,
holding court in various locations. There are now thirteen federal
judicial circuits wherein the United States Courts of Appeal are
allocated the appellate jurisdiction of the United States.
CIRCUIT COURT one of several courts in a given jurisdiction; a part of a
system of federal courts extending over one or more counties or
districts; formerly applied to the U. S. courts of appeals. Compare
district court.
CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE indirect evidence; secondary facts by
which a principal fact may be reasonably inferred.
EXAMPLE: There are no eyewitnesses to place Julio at the site of the car
accident, but there is a variety of circumstantial evidence to suggest that
Julio was involved. The prints at the scene of the accident match the
tires on his car, the color of several scratches on the other person’s car is
the same as the color of Julio’s car, and his car is dented precisely where
the other driver said it would be. That evidence could be used to
implicate Julio in the collision. Compare direct evidence.
CITATION 1. a reference to a legal authority—for example, a citation to a
statute or case; 2. a writ similar to a summons, in that it commands the
appearance of a party in a proceeding. The object of a citation is to give
the court proper jurisdiction and to notify the defendant that a suit has
been filed.
CITE 1. to summon; to order to appear, as before a tribunal; 2. to make
reference to a text, statute, case or other legal authority in support of a
proposition or argument; also the reference thus made.
CITE CHECKING see spading.
CITIZEN a member of a nation or political community; one who owes
allegiance to, and may claim protection from, its government. Under the
Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution, all persons born or
naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof,
are citizens of the United States and of the state wherein they reside.
Citizenship is the status of being a citizen. In the United States, there is
usually a double citizenship, that is, citizenship in the nation and
citizenship in the state in which one resides.
Generally, in the United States, one may acquire citizenship by birth in
the United States or by naturalization therein. See naturalized citizen.
However, a person who becomes a United States citizen through
naturalization is not considered a NATURAL BORN CITIZEN (a person born
within the jurisdiction of the United States) and consequently, is not
eligible to become President or Vice-President of the United States.
Compare legal permanent resident [LPR]. A child born in the United
States of alien parents is a citizen of the United States. A foreign-born
child of citizens of the United States, subject to certain qualifications
and limitations, is a citizen of the United States. A child born in the
United States of a diplomatic representative, such as an ambassador or
minister, takes the nationality of such representative. When a foreign
child from a Hague Convention country is adopted by a citizen of the
United States, the child receives an immigrant visa and automatically
acquires citizenship if the child enters prior to his or her eighteenth
birthday. For orphan, non-Hague country adoptions, and where the child
was not seen prior to adoption, the child becomes a permanent resident
upon entry and will acquire citizenship upon the child’s finalized
adoption in the United States. When the child is between 18 and 21, the
rules vary. The Child Citizenship Act of 2000 controls. American
Indians [Native Americans] are citizens of the United States and of the
states in which they reside. They are also citizens of their Tribes
according to the criteria established by each Tribe. For purposes of
diversity jurisdiction: a municipality may be considered a citizen; a
corporation is deemed a citizen of the state in which it maintains its
principal place of business; counties are citizens; the United States is
not a citizen; and states are not citizens. See also Immigration and
Customs Enforcement [ICE].
CITIZEN, NATURAL BORN see citizen [NATURAL BORN CITIZEN].
CITIZEN, NATURALIZED see naturalized citizen.
CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION SERVICES [USCIS] part of the
Department of Homeland Security that oversees lawful immigration
to the United States. This agency processes citizenship and
naturalization eligibility, immigration of family members, and
international adoption documents. It also manages the process that
allows individuals from other countries to work in the United States and
administers humanitarian programs that provide protection to
individuals inside and outside the United States who are displaced by
war, famine, and civil and political unrest, and those who are forced to
flee their countries to escape the risk of death and torture at the hands of
persecutors. See www.uscis.gov. See also alien; citizen; deportability;
green card; Immigration and Customs Enforcement [ICE]; legal
permanent resident [LPR]; naturalized citizen.
CIVIL 1. the branch of law that pertains to suits other than criminal
practice and is concerned with the rights and duties of persons in
contract, tort, etc.; 2. civil law as opposed to common law.
CIVIL ACTION an action to protect a private right or to compel a civil
remedy in a dispute between private parties, as distinguished from a
criminal prosecution.
CIVIL AERONAUTICS BOARD [CAB] an independent federal agency
established by Congress in 1938 to regulate commercial aviation and
provide public air safety and navigation facilities. In 1958, Congress
transferred all the functions except economic regulation of air carriers,
aircraft registration, pilot licensing, and accident investigation to the
Federal Aviation Administration [FAA].
CIVIL CONTEMPT see contempt of court.
CIVIL COURTS see court.
CIVIL DAMAGE ACTS see dram shop act.
CIVIL DEATH at common law, civil death was the status given to a
person who, though alive, had been convicted of a felony and sentenced
to life imprisonment. It referred to the fact that the convicted person had
lost all civil rights and was thus thought to be dead as regards his or her
participation in society. The convict could not, for example, sue or
inherit since in contemplation of law he or she did not exist; in fact, a
next friend was often designated to represent the interests of a civilly
dead person. Some states still apply civil death to persons serving life
sentences; however, there is no general agreement as to the scope of the
civil rights lost. Most states deny specific rights to convicted felons
such as the right to vote or to hold public office.
CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE the refusal to obey a law for the purpose of
demonstrating its unfairness or social undesirability; generally does not
apply to violent efforts to oppose laws.
EXAMPLE: Katie leads a group of protestors who sit down in a roadway to
prevent vehicles from entering a nuclear weapons site and thus disrupt
the activities at that site. The group may be forceably removed by the
police and/or charged with various offenses such as trespassing or
obstructing a passageway, yet they feel they have achieved their goal of
calling attention to their concern.
CIVIL DISORDER any public disturbance involving acts of violence by a
group of three or more persons causing immediate danger, damage, or
injury to the property or person of another individual.
CIVIL LAW l. Roman law embodied in the Justinian Code and presently
prevailing in most Western European states; it is also the foundation of
the law of Louisiana; 2. the law concerned with noncriminal matters; 3.
the body of laws established by a state or nation, as distinguished from
natural law.
CIVIL LIABILITY amenability to civil action as distinguished from
criminal action; a liability to actions seeking private remedies or the
enforcement of personal rights, based on contract, tort, etc.
CIVIL LIBERTIES see civil rights.
CIVIL PARTNERSHIP see civil union; marriage.
CIVIL PENALTIES fines or money damages imposed by a regulatory
scheme. Civil penalties are imposed as punishment for a certain activity
and act as a criminal sanction, while civil remedies redress wrongs
between private parties.
CIVIL PROCEDURE the body of rules of practice to be adhered to in
adjudicating a controversy before a court of civil, as opposed to
criminal, jurisdiction. The term refers to matters of form rather than to
the principles of substantive law that must be applied to determine the
rights of the parties.
CIVIL RIGHTS the nonpolitical rights of all citizens, especially those
rights relating to personal liberty. Civil rights differ from CIVIL
LIBERTIES in that civil rights are positive in nature, and civil liberties,
negative; that is, civil liberties are immunities from governmental
interference or limitations on governmental action (as in the First
Amendment) that have the effect of reserving rights to individuals.
EXAMPLE: Neal is harassed as he enters a building designated as a polling
place. The purpose is to prevent Neal from voting. The harassment
violates Neal’s civil rights, since he is guaranteed his right to vote.
CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964 federal act passed to amend statutes
passed after the Civil War to provide stronger protection for individual
rights guaranteed by the Constitution.
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSIONS see patronage [CIVIL SERVICE
COMMISSIONS].
CIVIL UNION ceremony between same-sex persons which conveys to
them certain aspects of marriage for purposes of that state’s laws (but
not those of other states or the federal government). States which
recognize civil unions provide that those persons receive the same rights
as married persons with respect to mutual financial support, child
custody and support, property division and maintenance, adoption,
survivorship, insurance and health care coverage, causes of action for
wrongful death or other tort laws, tax laws of that state, prohibitions
against discrimination, and other rights. Parties to civil unions are
included in the definitions for spouse, family, immediate family,
dependent, and next of kin. At time of press, civil unions are largely
replaced by state marriage laws allowing marriage between same-sex
persons.
EXAMPLEs: Ebony and Gretchen enter into a civil union and adopt a child,
Deb. Ebony is critically injured in an automobile accident and Gretchen
makes the decision to terminate life support and to donate Ebony’s
organs. Gretchen also inherits Ebony’s share of their tenancy by the
entirety and retains full custody of Deb.
Carter and Sanjay dissolve their union and since Carter’s job pays
substantially more than Sanjay’s, Sanjay is entitled to receive spousal
support from Carter. See alimony.
CIVITAS (sĭ’-vĭ-täs) Lat: in the Roman Law, any body of people living
under the same laws; citizenship, state, commonwealth, community.
C.J. abbreviation for Chief Justice or Chief Judge.
C.J.S. Corpus Juris Secundum.
CLA see National Association of Legal Assistants [CLA].
CLAIM l. the assertion of a right to money or property; 2. in pleading, the
facts giving rise to a right enforceable in the courts, which must show
the existence of a right, an injury and damages. One who makes a claim
is the claimant.
CLAIMANT the party who asserts a right to money or property. See
claim.
CLAIM FOR REFUND a claim by a taxpayer to the Internal Revenue
Service that he or she is entitled to a refund of all or part of the taxes
paid by him or her in earlier years; such a claim must be made in
writing within a specified time from the filing date of the return to
which it relates and is a necessary prerequisite to any allowance of a
refund by the IRS or to any suit by the taxpayer against the IRS for
disallowance of a claimed refund.
CLAIM OF RIGHT a doctrine that requires taxpayers to include in their
gross income all amounts received by them under claim that they are
entitled to the amounts, whether or not they are legally entitled to keep
them and whether they are required to repay them in a subsequent year.
When repayment occurs, a deduction is allowed under a special section
of the Internal Revenue Code designed to minimize the tax distortion
caused by the inclusion of such amounts in the wrong tax years.
CLASS ACTION a suit brought by one or more members of a large group
of persons on behalf of all members of the group. If the court permits
the class action, all members must receive notice of the action and must
be given an opportunity to exclude themselves. Members who do not
exclude themselves are bound by the judgment, whether favorable or
not.
EXAMPLE: In accordance with securities law, a corporation files a
registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission
concerning a stock sale. After investors buy several million shares of
stock and a few years pass, the corporation files for bankruptcy. At that
point, a few of the investors realize the statement was false and
misleading. Those investors, on behalf of all investors of the
corporation, file a class action lawsuit seeking to recover the money
they originally paid for the stock.
CLASS GIFT a gift of an aggregate sum to a body of persons uncertain in
number at the time of the gift, to be ascertained at a future time, who are
all to take in equal, or other definite proportions, the share of each being
dependent for its amount upon the ultimate number.
CLASSIFIED STOCK common stock divided into two or more classes. A
typical approach is for a company to issue Class A stock to raise the
bulk of equity capital while vesting voting rights in Class B stock,
which is retained by management and/or founders. The practice is
usually confined to promotional ventures, and very few publicly held
companies have classified stock as part of their capitalization.
CLAUSE see respective entries, e.g., escalator clause.
CLAYTON ACT a federal statute amending the Sherman Antitrust Act.
The Act prohibits certain types of price and other discriminations, now
covered by the Robinson-Patman Act; tying, exclusive dealing, and
total requirements agreements; mergers or acquisitions tending
substantially to lessen competition in any line of commerce, and
interlocking directorates. See antitrust laws.
CLEAN ELECTIONS the public financing of political campaigns. To
qualify for public funding, a candidate would have to raise a threshold
amount of small contributions (for example, $10 per person), depending
on the size of the district’s population, and reach a threshold amount
(for example, $15,000). Once that amount is raised, the candidate gets
grants (for the primary election and then for the general election) in
exchange for an agreement to raise no more money. The candidate
would be eligible for additional matching funds to keep pace in an
election where the opponent is a privately funded candidate. Such
elections are thought to encourage politicians to be accountable to
constituents rather than campaign contributors, level the playing field
by giving all citizens a fair possibility of being elected, and save
taxpayers money.
CLEAN HANDS (DOCTRINE) the concept in equity that a claimant
who seeks equitable relief must not himself or herself have acted
unfairly or unjustly in the transaction in which relief is sought.
CLEAN MONEY see clean elections.
CLEAR see free and clear.
CLEAR AND CONVINCING as a standard of proof, the amount of
evidence that is beyond mere preponderance but is not “beyond
reasonable doubt,” which will convince the trier of fact (fact finder)
as to the facts sought to be established.
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER in constitutional law, a standard used
to determine if one’s First Amendment right to speak may be curtailed
or punished. If the words are spoken in such circumstances and are of
such a nature as to create a clear and present danger that they will bring
about certain evils that government has a right to prevent, the
government may prohibit or punish the use of those words.
CLEARINGHOUSE 1. an association, usually formed voluntarily by
banks, to exchange checks, drafts or other forms of indebtedness held
by one member and owed to another. Its object is to effect at one time
and place the daily settlement of balances between the banks of a city or
region with a minimum of inconvenience and labor. 2. in a stock or
commodities exchange, an organization to facilitate settlement of the
debits and credits of its members with each other. In essence, it operates
on the same principles of centrality and convenience as does the
clearinghouse association for banks. For example, if broker A is
obligated to deliver 5,000 shares of XYZ stock and is entitled to receive
4,500 such shares from brokers B, C, and D, at the end of the day he
would deliver to the clearinghouse only 500 shares.
CLEAR TITLE title free from any encumbrance, obstruction, burden or
limitation that presents a doubtful or even a reasonable question of law
or fact as to its validity. See good title; marketable title.
CLEMENCY the act of forgiving a person the criminal liability of his or
her acts. The term is generic and embraces pardon, amnesty, and
commutation. The power of clemency is usually vested in the chief
executive. See executive clemency.
CLERGYMEN’S PRIVILEGE see priest-penitent privilege.
CLERICAL ERROR a mistake made while copying or transmitting legal
documents as distinguished from a JUDICIAL ERROR, which is an error
made in the exercise of judgment or discretion.
CLERIC’S PRIVILEGE see priest-penitent privilege.
CLERK an assistant or a subordinate. A COURT CLERK is an officer whose
duties include keeping records, issuing process and entering judgment.
A LAW CLERK is an assistant to a lawyer or a judge, whose primary job
is to aid in the research and writing of briefs or opinions and the
handling of cases.
CLICKWRAP [CLICKTHROUGH] LICENSE terms of service
providing access to software or a web site. The user agrees to the terms
by clicking yes or indicating agreement in the installation or sign-in
process. A SHRINKWRAP LICENSE is one where the user agrees to terms
by opening the shrinkwrap which encloses the boxed software.
Rejection of the terms means the software or web site cannot be
accessed. Most provisions of such a unilateral contract are upheld in
legal challenges but not necessarily every term of the contract. See
adhesion contract.
CLOSE see breaking a close; enclosure.
CLOSE CORPORATION see corporation.
CLOSED END FUNDS see investment company [TRUST].
CLOSED-END MANAGEMENT COMPANY a management
investment company that issues a fixed number of shares. The shares
are redeemable through secondary market transactions rather than
directly from the investment management company as in an open-end
management investment company [MUTUAL FUND]. The shares of a
closed-end management company are generally listed for trading on a
stock exchange.
CLOSED-END MORTGAGE see mortgage [CLOSED-END MORTGAGE].
CLOSED SHOP an enterprise in which, because it is required by the terms
of a collective bargaining agreement between a labor union and the
owners/managers of the enterprise, all workers must be union members,
as a condition of their employment.
CLOSELY HELD CORPORATION see corporation [CLOSE
CORPORATIONS].
CLOSING the consummation of a transaction involving the sale of real
estate or of an interest in real estate, usually by payment of the purchase
price (or some agreed portion), delivery of the deed or other
instrument of title, and finalizing of collateral matters.
CLOSING AGREEMENT a written agreement between a taxpayer and
the Internal Revenue Service that conclusively settles his or her tax
liability for the taxable year ending prior to the agreement date or
settles one or more issues affecting his or her tax liability. The
agreement is binding on both the taxpayer and the IRS unless fraud or
misrepresentation of a material fact is demonstrated.
CLOSING LAWS see blue laws; Sunday closing laws.
CLOSING STATEMENT see statement [CLOSING STATEMENT];
summation [SUMMING UP].
CLOTURE in legislative assemblies that permit unlimited debate
(FILIBUSTER), a procedure or rule by which debate is ended so that a
vote may be taken on the matter. In the U.S. Senate, a two-thirds
majority vote of the body is required to invoke cloture and terminate
debate.
CLOUD ON TITLE any matter appearing in the record of a title to real
estate that on its face appears to reflect the existence of an outstanding
claim or encumbrance that, if valid, would defeat or impair title, but
that might be proven invalid by evidence outside the title record.
EXAMPLE: Sadie locates a house she wants to buy but demands an
abstract of title to be sure that no one else may have a claim to the land
or house. The abstract shows a cloud on the title from about 60 years
ago concerning a transfer of the land wherein a joint owner did not sign
the deed transferring title. Sadie may not want to purchase the house, or
she may want title insurance to cover a problem if one arises.
Where a cloud on a title exists, the seller ordinarily gives the purchaser
a quitclaim deed, which transfers all of the interest the seller owns and
no more. Title companies usually will not insure a clouded title or will
insure it subject to that cloud which is listed in the policy as an
exception.
CO Prefix meaning equal, with. Abbreviation for commanding officer,
company, county, central office or contractual obligation. Also,
certificate of occupancy.
COAST GUARD see Department of Homeland Security [DHS] [UNITED
STATES COAST GUARD].
COBRA see affordable care act [COBRA].
COCONSPIRATOR EXCEPTION see hearsay rule.
CODE a systematic compilation of laws, for example, the Criminal Code
(referring to penal laws) and the Motor Vehicle Code (referring to laws
relating to motor vehicles).
CO-DEFENDANT a defendant who is joined together with one or more
other defendants in a single action. See joinder.
CODE OF MILITARY JUSTICE see military law [UNIFORM CODE OF
MILITARY JUSTICE].
CODE OF PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY a set of rules based on
ethical considerations that govern the conduct of lawyers; passed by the
American Bar Association and adopted by most states; enforced by
state disciplinary boards. Some states require lawyers to prove their
knowledge of the Code by passage of a course or test before being
allowed to practice in that state.
CODE PLEADING the term applied to the system of pleading, now
abandoned, which was developed in this country through practice codes
enacted in a majority of the states, to consolidate and improve the
common law and equity systems of pleading previously used.
CODICIL a supplement to a will, whose purpose is to add to, subtract
from, or qualify, modify or revoke the provisions of a prior will.
EXAMPLE: Constantine executed his will at a time when his relationship
with his brother was at a low point. As the relationship improves,
Constantine writes a codicil to his will providing that a certain amount
of money pass to the brother. The codicil also revokes any prior
statement in the will that specifically denies the brother anything.
CODIS Combined DNA Index System. A Federal Bureau of
Investigation laboratory that blends forensic science and computer
technology into an effective tool for solving violent crimes. CODIS
enables federal, state, and local crime labs to exchange and compare
DNA testing profiles (taken from blood, saliva, or semen samples)
electronically, thereby linking crimes to each other and to convicted
offenders.
COERCION any form of compulsion or constraint that compels or induces
a person to act otherwise than freely. It may be physical force but is
more often used to describe any pressure that is brought to bear on
another’s free will. In testamentary law, if undue influence is exerted
upon the testator, the coercion will vitiate the effect of the instrument.
In criminal law, improper conduct that coerces the defendant into
making an incriminatory statement will void the confession. See
criminal coercion; duress.
COGENT appealing forcibly to the mind or reason; compelling;
convincing. The word is frequently used to describe the quality of a
particular legal argument. It is derived from the Latin cogo, cogere,
which means “to bind, drive, or compress into a mass.”
COGNIZABLE within the jurisdiction of the court. An interest is
cognizable in a court of law when that court has the power to decide the
controversy.
COGNOVIT JUDGMENT see confession of judgment.
COGNOVIT NOTE a promissory note in which the debtor authorizes an
attorney to enter a confession of judgment against him or her in the
event of nonpayment.
COHABITATION literally, the act of living together; often statutorily
expanded to include living together publicly, as a couple. Cohabitation
among unmarried persons was once proscribed by local laws, as it
produced an inference of criminal fornication. Where common law
marriages are recognized, cohabitation for a period of time is required.
CO-HEIR one who inherits a property with another.
COHORT(S) associate or companion. Also can be plural, as in a group
with members that have shared characteristics.
COIF headdress formerly worn by English sergeants at law. “Order of the
Coif” is an honorary legal fraternity in the United States.
COINSURANCE an insurance plan in which the insurer provides
indemnity for only a certain percentage of the insured’s loss, reflecting
the relative division of risk between insurer and insured.
COLA see cost of living adjustment.
COLLATERAL 1. secondary; on the side; 2. in commercial transactions,
the property offered as security, usually as an inducement to another
party to lend money or extend credit.
IMPAIRMENT OF COLLATERAL lessening of the effect of the collateral; an
act whose effect is to reduce the value of the collateral as security for
the obligation it is intended to assure.
COLLATERAL AFFINITY see affinity [COLLATERAL AFFINITY].
COLLATERAL ATTACK a challenge to the integrity of a prior
judgment, brought in a special proceeding intended for that express
purpose. A direct attack, on the other hand, is an attempt to impeach a
judgment within the same action in which the judgment was rendered,
through an appeal, request for new trial, etc. Lack of proper jurisdiction
and constitutional infirmities in the original judgment are often grounds
for collateral attack. Habeas corpus is a “collateral attack” remedy.
COLLATERAL CONSANGUINITY [LINE] see consanguinity
[COLLATERAL CONSANGUINITY]; lineal [COLLATERAL LINE].
COLLATERAL ESTOPPEL the doctrine recognizing that the
determination of facts litigated between two parties in a proceeding is
binding on those parties in all future proceedings against each other;
also known as issue preclusion. In a subsequent action between the
parties on a different claim, the judgment is conclusive as to the issues
raised in the subsequent action, if these issues were actually litigated
and determined in the prior action. The constitutional prohibition
against double jeopardy includes within it the right of the defendant
(but not the state) to plead “collateral estoppel” and thereby preclude
proof of some essential element of the state’s case found in the
defendant’s favor at an earlier trial. See estoppel. See also bar;
merger; res judicata.
EXAMPLE: Damien is charged with robbing six persons at a poker game
and his defense in the first trial involving the alleged robbery of only
one of the victims is that he wasn’t there [ALIBI], and if he is acquitted
at that trial due to the jury’s specific acceptance of his alibi, the state
will be estopped to relitigate the alibi question with respect to the other
related robberies.
COLLATERAL FRAUD see fraud [EXTRINSIC [COLLATERAL] FRAUD].
COLLATERAL HEIRS see heirs [COLLATERAL HEIRS].
COLLATERAL SOURCE RULE benefits or compensation received by
an injured person from a separate source such as insurance do not serve
to reduce the damages owed by a tortfeasor.
COLLATION the preparation of an estimate of the value of advancements
made by an intestate [person who dies without a will] to his or her
children, in order that the whole of the estate may be divided in
accordance with law.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING the process of settling labor disputes by
negotiation between the employer and representatives of employees.
Compare arbitration.
COLLOQUIUM allegation in a declaration or complaint of libel under
common law pleadings, which purport to connect the libelous words
with the plaintiff by setting forth extrinsic facts showing that they
applied to the plaintiff and were so intended by the defendant.
COLLUSION 1. the making of a secret agreement with another to commit
fraud or engage in other illegal activity, or in legal activity with an
illegal end in mind; 2. an agreement between husband and wife to
suppress facts or to make up evidence important to the existence of
lawful grounds for divorce.
COLLUSIVE ACTION an action brought by parties not actually
adversaries to determine a hypothetical point of law or to produce a
desired legal precedent. Because such a suit does not involve a genuine
controversy, it will not be entertained by a court.
COLOR deceptive appearance or disguise; designates hiding a set of facts
behind a false, but technically proper, legal theory. See color of law;
color of title.
COLORABLE that which presents an appearance that does not correspond
with the reality, or an appearance intended to conceal or to deceive.
COLOR OF LAW the semblance of legal right. An action under color of
law has the apparent authority of law but is actually contrary to law.
COLOR OF TITLE an instrument that appears to pass title, and on which
one relies as passing title, but that is not valid, either because title is
lacking in the person conveying or because the conveyance itself is
defective.
COMAKERS two (or more) persons who sign a note. Upon such
signature, each assumes full liability in the event of default by the other
person(s). Generally used to assist a borrower with questionable
creditworthiness to obtain financing (such as a parent signing on a
child’s car loan). Considered synonymous with surety. Often considered
synonymous with COSIGNER although the specific terms of the contract
may vary depending upon the signature location, whether any loan
proceeds were received by the cosigner, and the parties’ intent. A
cosigner might recover full value in a suit brought against a borrower
(after default) while a comaker’s recovery against the borrower might
be limited. Compare accommodation maker.
EXAMPLE: Aida graduates with a teaching degree and decides to open her
own preschool. Unfortunately she has not established a sufficient credit
history to qualify for low-rate loans so her father Abdul signs as a
comaker and the bank issues the loan at the rate sought by Aida.
COMITY [COMITAS] a rule of courtesy by which one court defers to the
concomitant jurisdiction of another; most often used in reference to the
long-standing public policy against federal court interference with state
criminal proceedings.
EXAMPLE: Jack kidnaps a young girl and takes her across state lines, a
crime that violates both federal and state laws. Although Jack could be
prosecuted by both jurisdictions or either of them, under principles of
comity the federal prosecutor allows the state to proceed first, because
of the anger of the community and their desire to try Jack in a local
setting.
COMMENT statements made by a judge or counsel concerning a
defendant, where such statements are not based on fact, but rather on
alleged facts.
COMMERCE CLAUSE Art. I, Sec. 8, Cl. 3 of the Constitution
providing “. . . Congress shall have Power . . . to regulate Commerce
with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian
Tribes. . . .” Federal regulations regarding business such as the
Occupational Safety and Health Act have their roots in the commerce
clause. See interstate commerce.
COMMERCE POWER see power, constitutional [COMMERCE POWER].
COMMERCIAL BANK see bank [COMMERCIAL BANK].
COMMERCIAL BRIBERY see bribery [COMMERCIAL BRIBERY].
COMMERCIAL FRUSTRATION see frustration (of purpose).
COMMERCIAL LAW the body of law that concerns the rights and
obligations of persons in their commercial dealings with one another
(such as the Uniform Commercial Code, laws prohibiting unfair trade
practices, etc.). See law merchant; mercantile law; Uniform
Commercial Code.
COMMERCIAL NAME see trade name.
COMMERCIAL PAPER a negotiable instrument, that is, a writing
indorsed by the maker or drawer, containing an unconditional promise
or order to pay a certain sum on demand or at a specified time, and
payable to order or to bearer. See also order paper.
COMMERCIAL PREFERENCE see preference.
COMMERCIAL UNIT a unit considered by trade or usage to be a whole
that cannot be divided without materially impairing its value, character
or use; for example, a machine or a suite of furniture. Since acceptance
of any part of a commercial unit constitutes acceptance of the whole, the
term becomes significant when a buyer attempts to reject part of a
contract for nonconformance. If the item rejected is part of a
commercial unit, the rejection will not be allowed.
COMMINGLING OF FUNDS the act of a fiduciary or trustee, including
a lawyer, in mixing his or her own funds with those belonging to a
client or customer; generally prohibited unless the fiduciary maintains
an exact accounting of the client’s funds and how they have been used.
EXAMPLE: The bank trustee felt he had an excellent tip on a stock, so he
commingled the funds of one of the bank trusts with his own funds. The
investment is successful, but the trustee is still disciplined because he
never made an exact accounting of the stock purchased with trust
money.
COMMISSION a fee paid to an employee or agent for services performed
—especially, a percentage of a total amount received in a transaction—
as distinguished from salary, which is a fixed amount payable
periodically.
COMMISSION, MILITARY see military law [MILITARY COMMISSION].
COMMITMENT 1. a judge’s order directing that a person be taken to
prison or jail, either to await trial or following an imposition of
sentence; 2. an order mandating a person to confinement in a medical
institution.
COMMITTEE 1. in legislative practice, a group appointed to investigate
some special matter or area of interest and report its findings and
recommendations to the legislative body; 2. a person appointed by the
court to manage the affairs of a legally incompetent person. See
guardian; ward.
COMMODITY [COMMODITIES] any tangible good; a product that is
the subject of sale or barter. See also futures.
COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION [CFTC] the
federal agency that regulates commodity futures and option markets in
the United States. The CFTC’s mission is to protect market users and
the public from fraud, manipulation, and abusive practices related to the
sale of commodity and financial futures and options, and to foster open,
competitive, and financially sound futures and options markets. The
Securities and Exchange Commission fulfills a similar function in the
securities markets.
COMMON AREA in landlord-tenant law, portions of premises used in
common by all tenants. A large number of cases have imposed liability
on the landlord on the basis of “retained control” with injuries
sustained when the landlord has failed to maintain common areas in
reasonably safe condition. Implicit in these decisions is the notion that
since no individual tenant controls the common area, control remains
with the landlord. Common areas to which the landlord’s obligation has
been extended include stairways, porches, hallways and entrance areas,
elevators, yards, and basements.
COMMON CARRIER see carrier [COMMON CARRIER].
COMMON LAW the system of jurisprudence, which originated in
England and was later applied in the United States, that is based on
judicial precedent (court decisions or case law) rather than legislative
enactment (statutes) and is therefore derived from principles rather than
rules.
In the absence of statutory law regarding a particular subject, the
judge-made rules of common law are the law on that subject. Thus the
traditional phrase “at common law” refers to the state of the law in a
particular field prior to the enactment of legislation in that field.
COMMON LAW COPYRIGHT see copyright [COMMON LAW
COPYRIGHT].
COMMON LAW MARRIAGE one based not upon ceremony and
compliance with legal formalities, but upon the agreement of two
persons, legally competent to marry, to cohabit with the intention of
being husband and wife, usually for a minimum period of seven years.
COMMON LAW TRUST see Massachusetts trust.
COMMON NUISANCE see nuisance [PUBLIC [COMMON] NUISANCE].
COMMON PROPERTY see community property; property.
COMMONS l. land set aside for public use, for example, public parks; 2.
the untitled class of Great Britain, represented in Parliament by the
House of Commons.
COMMON STOCK a security representing an ownership interest in a
corporation. Ownership may also be shared with preferred stock,
which has prior claim on any dividends to be paid and, in the event of
liquidation, prior claim to the distribution of the corporation’s assets. As
owners of the corporation, common stockholders (shareholders)
assume the primary risk if business is poor, realize the greater return in
the event of success and elect the board of directors that controls the
company.
COMMONWEALTH the public; the people; a government which
concerns itself with the rights of the people rather than the rulers. From
“common weal,” a term for the public good. Four of the 50 states
(Kentucky, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and Virginia) use
“Commonwealth of” rather than “State of.”
COMMUNITY NOTIFICATION see registration of offenders
[COMMUNITY NOTIFICATION].
COMMUNITY PROPERTY all property that a husband and wife acquire
by joint effort during marriage. Property owned prior to marriage or
acquired by gift or inheritance is considered SEPARATE PROPERTY.
EXAMPLE: As a result of hard work and prudent investing, Anji has
acquired a great deal of property during her marriage. If the marriage
fails, her spouse is entitled to one-half of whatever property she has
acquired in her work if the couple reside in a state that follows
community property law. That law applies regardless of the fact that
Anji’s efforts alone resulted in accumulation of the property.
Currently, nine states have adopted the community property doctrine.
Other states have instead adopted EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION statutes to
achieve a similar distribution of the marital estate upon dissolution of a
marriage.
Community property is similar to, but should be distinguished from,
TENANCY BY THE ENTIRETY and JOINT TENANCY (see tenancy).
COMMUTATION change; in criminal law, substituting a lesser
punishment for a greater one, such as life imprisonment for a death
sentence, a shorter term for a longer one. Commutation is the
prerogative of the chief executive (president or governor), who possess
the power of executive clemency. A commutation can be granted only
after a conviction, whereas other forms of clemency, such as a pardon,
can be granted at any time. Also, a commutation merely lessens
punishment, while a pardon removes all legal disabilities of a
conviction. Compare reprieve.
EXAMPLE: Several years ago, eight persons were sentenced to fifteen
years’ imprisonment for possession of a small quantity of marijuana. In
light of the new attitude towards personal use of the drug and the recent
decriminalization of many marijuana laws, the governor commuted
(reduced) the prisoners’ sentences to time already served, allowing the
prisoners to be released immediately.
COMPACT CLAUSE Art. I, Sec. 10, Cl. 3 of the Constitution providing
“No State shall, without the Consent of Congress . . . enter into any
Agreement or Compact with another State, or with a foreign Power. . .
.” INTERSTATE COMPACTS that have been congressionally approved
include those relating to boundaries and ports, conservation and flood
control, and educational and correctional interests.
COMPANY a group of people organized to perform an activity, business or
industrial enterprise.
HOLDING COMPANY see holding company.
JOINT STOCK COMPANY a company or association, usually
unincorporated, that has the capital of its members pooled in a common
fund; the CAPITAL STOCK (see capital) is divided into shares and
distributed to represent ownership interest in the company. A form of
partnership, it is distinguished from a partnership in that the
membership of a joint stock company is changeable, its shares are
transferable, its members can be many and not necessarily known to
each other, and its members cannot act or speak for the company.
COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE see negligence.
COMPELLING INTEREST see equal protection of the laws.
COMPENSATION payment for work done or for an injury.
COMPENSATORY DAMAGES see damages [ACTUAL DAMAGES].
COMPETENT properly or legally qualified; able; capable of
understanding or of acting reasonably. COMPETENT EVIDENCE is both
relevant and proper to the issue being litigated. A COMPETENT COURT
has proper jurisdiction over the person or property at issue. A criminal
defendant is competent to stand trial if he or she is able to consult with
his or her lawyer with a reasonable degree of rational understanding and
has a rational as well as a factual understanding of the proceedings
against him or her. An individual is competent to make a will if he or
she understands the extent of his or her property, the identity of the
natural objects of his or her bounty, and the consequences of making a
will.
EXAMPLE: Upon their father’s death, his children learned that his will left
all his property to his mistress. The children brought a lawsuit to
invalidate the will, claiming the father was not competent to understand
what he was signing or to whom he was leaving his property. The
children’s evidence included examples of frequent outbursts of rage and
depression by the father, as well as occasional stays at a nearby mental
health facility.
COMPLAINANT the party who initiates the complaint in an action or
proceeding; practically synonymous with petitioner and plaintiff. The
appropriate term to use is determined by the nature of the proceeding
and the court in which it is instituted. Compare accused; defendant;
respondent.
COMPLAINT 1. in a civil action, the first pleading of the plaintiff setting
out the facts on which the claim is based; the purpose is to give notice to
the adversary of the nature and basis of the claim asserted; 2. in criminal
law, the preliminary charge or accusation made by one person against
another to the appropriate court or officer, usually a magistrate.
However, court proceedings, such as a trial, cannot be instituted until an
indictment or information has been handed down against the
defendant.
COMPOS MENTIS (ko*m’-po@s me*n’-tĭs) Lat.: mentally competent.
Compare non compos mentis.
COMPOUND CONCLUSION see question of law [COMPOUND
CONCLUSION].
COMPOUNDING A FELONY the refusal by one injured by a felony to
prosecute the felon, in exchange for which the injured party receives a
bribe or reparation.
COMPOUND INTEREST see interest [COMPOUND INTEREST].
COMPROMISE VERDICT see verdict [COMPROMISE VERDICT].
COMPULSORY APPEARANCE see appearance [COMPULSORY
APPEARANCE].
COMPULSORY ARBITRATION see arbitration [COMPULSORY
ARBITRATION].
COMPULSORY COUNTERCLAIM see counterclaim [COMPULSORY
COUNTERCLAIM].
COMPULSORY JOINDER see joinder [COMPULSORY JOINDER].
COMPULSORY LABOR see involuntary servitude.
COMPULSORY PROCESS the right of a defendant to have the
subpoena power of the court used on his or her behalf to compel the
appearance of witnesses. In civil actions, the right to compulsory
process is often secured through state constitutional or statutory
provisions. In a criminal proceeding, this right is guaranteed to the
defendant by the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
The right extends only to competent, material witnesses who are
subject to the court’s process and whose expected testimony will be
admissible.
COMPURAGATOR in early English law, one of a group of neighbors
called by a person accused of a crime to swear that the accused was
testifying truthfully. See wager of law.
COMPUTER CRIME illegal activity that either uses a computer to
commit the offense (such as cyberstalking, identity theft, theft, fraud,
or child sexual exploitation) or attacks another computer system by
way of hacking or the unleashing of a program virus.
CONCEALMENT an act making more difficult the discovery of that
which one is legally obligated to reveal or not to withhold, such as the
failure of a bankrupt to schedule all his or her assets, or the failure of
an applicant for an insurance policy to disclose information relevant to
the insurer’s decision to insure the risk.
ACTIVE CONCEALMENT concealing by words or deeds that which one has
a duty to reveal.
PASSIVE CONCEALMENT maintaining silence when a duty to speak exists.
CONCERTED ACTION [CONCERT OF ACTION] 1. action that has
been arranged and agreed upon between parties, in pursuit of some
common design or in accordance with some scheme. In criminal law,
concerted action is found only where there has been a conspiracy to
commit an illegal act—that is, all share the criminal intent of the actual
perpetrator. 2. The term also applies to joint tortfeasers where there is
tort liability for conspiracy.
CONCILIATION amicable agreement between parties that resolves a
dispute. Usually arrived at with the assistance of a CONCILIATOR
(similar to a mediator) but it is the parties themselves who resolve the
dispute. Compare arbitration where an arbitrator renders a decision
that binds the parties.
CONCILIATOR see conciliation [CONCILIATOR].
CONCLUSION OF FACT a conclusion as to a factual matter, reached
solely through the use of facts and natural reasoning, rather than rules of
law. See finding [FINDING OF FACT].
EXAMPLE: The legal issue before the judge is simple; if the manufacturer
does not provide necessary safeguards, the manufacturer is liable for the
workman’s injury. The only issue is a question of fact: Did the
manufacturer provide the safeguards which the workman subsequently
disregarded or were the safeguards never provided? After hearing the
evidence, the judge ruled as a conclusion of fact that the safeguards
were in place but had been disregarded by the workman.
CONCLUSION OF LAW a conclusion as to a legal issue, reached by
applying the rules of law. See finding [FINDING OF LAW].
EXAMPLE: In a particular case, the facts were not in question; but the
defense counsel never called a witness who might have been crucial to
the defendant’s case. A few years later, when the defendant attempts to
have the conviction reversed, the legal issue concerns the standard to be
used when a lawyer’s incompetency results in a conviction. As a
conclusion of law, the judge finds that, in his particular state, the law
requires a stronger showing of incompetence than the one made in this
case and therefore refuses to reverse the conviction.
CONCLUSIVE EVIDENCE evidence that is incontrovertible; not open or
not able to be questioned. Where a thing is conclusively proved, it
means that such result follows from the facts shown as the only
possibility. The term contemplates the degree of proof, and its meaning
in a particular statute depends largely on its context and the intention of
the legislature.
CONCLUSIVE PRESUMPTION see presumption.
CONCUR to agree. A concurring opinion agrees with the conclusion of the
majority but may state different reasons why such a conclusion is
reached.
CONCURRENT existing together; in conjunction with. In criminal law,
CONCURRENT SENTENCE describes multiple sentences that a convicted
defendant is to serve at the same time.
CONCURRENT CONDITION see condition [CONCURRENT CONDITION].
CONCURRENT COVENANTS see covenant [CONCURRENT
COVENANTS].
CONCURRENT JURISDICTION see jurisdiction [CONCURRENT
JURISDICTION].
CONCURRENT NEGLIGENCE see negligence [CONCURRENT
NEGLIGENCE].
CONCURRENT SENTENCES see sentence [CONCURRENT SENTENCES].
CONCURRING OPINION see opinion [CONCURRING OPINION].
CONDEMN 1. to take private property for public use, such as the building
of a highway, with or without consent but for just compensation; to
declare legally useless or unfit for habitation, as an unsafe building. 2.
to sentence to death a person convicted of a capital offense.
CONDITION l. a prerequisite or requirement; 2. a possible future event,
which will trigger the duty to perform a legal obligation or will cause a
real property interest to arise, vest or be extinguished.
CONCURRENT CONDITION a condition precedent that exists only when
parties to a contract are obligated to perform at the same time.
CONDITION PRECEDENT an act or event that must occur before a duty of
immediate performance of a promise arises, or before a real property
interest will arise or vest.
CONDITION SUBSEQUENT a fact that will extinguish a duty to make
compensation for BREACH OF CONTRACT after the breach has occurred,
or whose occurrence will result in the extinguishment of an interest in
real property.
CONDITIONAL dependent upon the happening or non-happening of the
condition; implies a type of incumbrance.
CONDITIONAL BEQUEST see bequest [CONDITIONAL BEQUEST].
CONDITIONAL CONTRACT see contract [CONDITIONAL CONTRACT].
CONDITIONAL DISCHARGE see sentence [SUSPENDED SENTENCE].
CONDITIONAL FEE [ESTATE] a limited fee simple that must
eventually pass from the donee to certain heirs or to the issue (children)
of the donee (heirs of the body). Should the designated heir fail to be
alive at the time of the donee’s death, the property reverts to the donor
or the donor’s estate. However, the entire estate remains with the donee
until his or her death, the donor having the mere possibility of a
reverter.
EXAMPLE: The mother gave Kim, her daughter, title to a home and
instructed Kim to pass the home to Kim’s daughter or, if she did not
have a daughter, to Kim’s son, upon Kim’s death. This gift to Kim was a
conditional fee, since if Kim died without a daughter or son, title to the
home returned to the mother. If the mother predeceased Kim, the home
would return to the mother’s estate and pass under the mother’s will.
CONDITIONAL SALE see sale [CONDITIONAL SALE].
CONDITION PRECEDENT see condition [CONDITION PRECEDENT].
CONDITION SUBSEQUENT see condition [CONDITION SUBSEQUENT].
CONDOMINIUM a type of ownership associated with multi-unit projects,
which consists of individual ownership (in fee) of a single unit and
shared ownership (tenancy in common) of the common areas (such as
elevators, grounds, etc.). A condominium is distinguished from a
COOPERATIVE, in which a corporate or business trust entity holds title
to the premises and grants rights of occupancy to apartments through
proprietary leases or similar arrangements.
CONFERENCE, PRETRIAL see pretrial conference.
CONFESSION an admission of guilt or other incriminating statement by
the accused; not admissible at trial unless voluntarily made. See
Miranda Rule. See involuntary [INVOLUNTARY CONFESSION]; oral
[ORAL CONFESSION].
CONFESSION AND AVOIDANCE a pleading by which a party admits
the allegations against him or her, either expressly or by implication,
but presents new matter that avoids or annuls the effect of his or her
admitting those allegations. See defense [AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE].
CONFESSION OF JUDGMENT the entry of a judgment upon the
written admission or confession of a debtor, without a legal
proceeding. It is accomplished through an advance, voluntary
submission to the jurisdiction of the court, as when a buyer of goods on
credit agrees in the purchase contract that if he or she fails to pay on
time the amounts due he or she will consent to the entry of a judgment
against him or her for the amount outstanding (and, often, reasonable
attorney’s fees not exceeding a fixed percentage).
CONFIDENCE GAME a scheme by which a swindler wins the
confidence of his or her victim and then cheats the victim of his or her
money by taking advantage of the confidence reposed in him or her.
CONFIDENTIAL COMMUNICATION see privileged communication.
CONFIRMATION see arbitrator [CONFIRMATION].
CONFISCATE 1. with regard to acts by a government entity, to take
private property without just compensation; 2. to seize goods or
property and divest the owner of his proprietary rights, usually as a
result of some violation of the law involving the goods or property
seized. Compare condemn.
CONFLICT[S] OF INTEREST[S] a situation in which regard for one
duty results in disregard for another, as when one attorney seeks to
represent two persons whose interests are adverse potentially or in fact;
an inconsistency between the public interest and the personal interest of
a public official which arises in connection with the performance of
official duties.
CONFLICT OF LAW [CHOICE OF LAW] the body of law that contains
the rules by which the court in which an action is brought chooses
between the applicable law of the court’s state (the “forum state”) and
the differing applicable law of another jurisdiction connected with the
controversy.
EXAMPLE: Mary died intestate (i.e., without a will). At her death, she
lived and owned property in Florida but had set up a trust in Delaware
for her children and grandchildren. Florida claims that, because Mary
was a resident of Florida, that state’s intestate laws should apply to all
of Mary’s property. Delaware feels that its intestate laws should apply to
the trust accounts since she purposefully set up the account in Delaware.
A court will consider the rules concerning conflict of laws to determine
which state’s law applies to the trust.
CONFORMED COPY an exact copy of a document, often certified to be
so by a clerk of a court, with handwritten notations duplicating those
on the original document. Thus, an order may have the date, precise
terms, and signature of the judge (s/Judge) written by hand on another
copy of a proposed order that had not been signed. This then becomes a
conformed copy of the order that was completed and signed by the
court.
EXAMPLE: Court Clerk Bailey conforms a copy of Judge Davis’ order by
writing “s/Judge Davis” on the copy.
CONFORMING goods or conduct including any part of a performance are
“conforming” or conform to the contract when they are in accordance
with the obligations under the contract.
CONFORMING USE see nonconforming use.
CONFRONTATION CLAUSE under the Sixth Amendment of the
Constitution, the accused in a criminal prosecution is entitled “to be
confronted with the witnesses against him.” This right entitles the
accused to be present at the trial, and to hear and cross-examine all
witnesses against him or her. Evidence that is not subject to
confrontation, such as the confession of a codefendant who is not
subject to cross-examination, may not be used against the accused.
CONFUSION OF GOODS a mixing together of personal property
belonging to two or more owners so the property of any of them no
longer can be identified except as part of a mass of like goods.
CONGLOMERATE a group of corporations engaged in unrelated
businesses and controlled by a single corporate entity. See merger
[CONGLOMERATE MERGER].
CONGRESS 1. a formal body of delegates or representatives; 2. in the
United States, the national legislative body consisting of the Senate and
the House of Representatives. The lawmaking power of the United
States vests in this body.
CONGRESSIONAL REFERENCE CASES see Federal Claims Court.
CONJECTURE a tenuous inference based upon facts within a person’s
knowledge. A witness may only testify as to facts within his or her
knowledge and may not present conjecture to the jury. A jury cannot
render a verdict on the basis of conjecture, but must find its verdict
based upon the evidence admitted in the trial of the matter.
CONJUGAL RIGHTS the rights of married persons, which include
companionship, domestic happiness, the comforts of dwelling together,
joint property rights, and the intimacies of domestic relations. In prison,
a CONJUGAL VISITATION permits an opportunity for sexual intimacy
between the inmate and his or her spouse.
CONJUNCTIVE DENIAL see denial [CONJUNCTIVE DENIAL]; negative
pregnant [CONJUNCTIVE DENIAL].
CONNECTED PACS see political action committee [CONNECTED PACS].
CONSANGUINITY the familial relationship of persons united by one or
more common ancestors. LINEAL CONSANGUINITY refers to persons who
are descended in a direct line from a common ancestor such as
grandparents, parents, children, grandchildren. COLLATERAL
CONSANGUINITY refers to persons who are descended from a common
ancestor but not in a direct line such as aunts and nephews, uncles and
grandnieces. Degrees of collateral consanguinity are determined by
counting generations up to the common ancestor, and then down to the
related party. Degrees of consanguinity sometimes control inheritance.
See descent and distribution; heirs; lineal.
CONSCIENCE OF THE COURT refers to the power of the court of
equity to resolve a controversy by applying common standards of
decency and fairness. The term does not refer to the private opinion of a
particular judge but to uniformly held judgment of the community. The
proper application of the doctrine rests upon general principles of
equitable law and to established precedent. Conduct that shocks the
conscience of the court will lead to the invalidation in part or in whole
of an unconscionable contract, or to the suppression of evidence as
violative of due process of law.
CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTOR a status recognized by U.S. Selective
Service (“draft”) laws and accorded to one who, in good conscience,
because of religious belief, is opposed to war. Such a person may be
excused from participation in military service otherwise required by law
and may be permitted to substitute community service.
CONSCIOUS PARALLELISM in antitrust law, an independent decision
by one party, aware that a particular course of conduct has been
followed by a competitor, to follow the same course; distinguished from
conspiracy, which requires an agreement, either implied or express,
between the parties engaged in the parallel conduct.
EXAMPLE: Shopper Supermarkets decides to end its three-month
promotion of offering double coupons. Because of Shopper’s action,
other area supermarkets end similar promotions. When complaints arise
against the supermarkets for acting together to raise prices by ending the
discounts, in violation of antitrust laws, the supermarkets reply that their
action was not unlawful but represented conscious parallelism—when
Shopper ended the discounts, the other supermarkets felt they could do
the same without losing business but they did not act together in an
anticompetitive and illegal way.
CONSECUTIVE SENTENCE see sentence [CONSECUTIVE [CUMULATIVE]
SENTENCE].
CONSENT voluntary agreement; an act of reason, not based on fraud,
duress or mistake. Consent is implied in every agreement.
CONSENT DECREE see consent judgment [CONSENT DECREE]; decree.
CONSENT, INFORMED see informed consent.
CONSENT JUDGMENT recorded agreement of parties to a lawsuit
concerning the form the judgment should take. Such a contract cannot
be nullified without consent of the parties, except for fraud or mistake.
Consent judgments have the same force as any other judgment. Because
the agreement of the parties waives exception to irregularities before
agreement, appeal from a consent judgment is limited to attack for
mistake, fraud or lack of jurisdiction.
CONSENT DECREE the counterpart of a consent judgment issued in a
court of equity; only as binding as any other equitable remedy. For
instance, in antitrust cases, the court can modify a consent decree
according to changed circumstances.
CONSENT ORDER any court order to which the opposing party agrees; in
antitrust law, an agreement between the Federal Trade Commission
and a party being investigated; the party consents to cease activities that
could be subject of antitrust action and the FTC refrains from initiating
suit.
CONSENT ORDER see consent judgment [CONSENT ORDER].
CONSENT SEARCH a search made by an authorized person after the
subject of the search has voluntarily consented. The constitutional
immunity from unreasonable searches and seizures may be waived by
consent to a search or seizure. Once an individual has consented to a
search he or she cannot later challenge the search. In order to constitute
a lawful waiver the consent must be given intelligently and voluntarily.
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES see damages [CONSEQUENTIAL
[SPECIAL] DAMAGES].
CONSERVATOR temporary court-appointed guardian or custodian of
property.
CONSIDERATION something of value given in return for performance or
promise of performance for the purpose of forming a contract;
generally required to make a promise binding and to make agreement of
the parties enforceable as a contract. Consideration distinguishes a
contract from a gift.
FAILURE OF CONSIDERATION or WANT OF CONSIDERATION refers to the
circumstance in which consideration was bargained for but either has
become worthless, has ceased to exist or has not been provided as
promised.
EXAMPLE: Although Paula ran a prosperous business on the West Coast
and was enjoying life as a “single,” she agreed to return East to care for
her aging mother. As a demonstration of her gratitude, the mother
promised Paula the money located in a bank account. Nothing was ever
signed, and upon the mother’s death, the other children contested
Paula’s claim to the whole account. They felt that there was no contract
between the mother and Paula because Paula gave no consideration in
return for the money in the account. A court would probably find that
Paula’s care for the mother at the mother’s request, as well as the giving
up of a prosperous business, constituted consideration and hence the
promise is enforceable.
CONSIDERED DICTUM see dictum [CONSIDERED DICTUM].
CONSIGNMENT bailment for care or sale. A delivery of goods, without
sale, to a dealer, who must sell the goods and remit the price to the
person making delivery; or if the goods are not sold, the dealer must
return them to the owner.
CONSIGNEE 1. a person to whom goods are shipped for sale under a
consignment contract; 2. the person named in a bill of lading to whom
the bill promises delivery; 3. one to whom a carrier may lawfully make
delivery in accordance with his or her contract of carriage. See carrier
[COMMON CARRIER].
CONSIGNOR one who sends a consignment; a shipper of goods; the
person calling upon a common carrier for transportation service, who is
not necessarily the person in whose name a bill of lading is made.
CONSOLIDATE combine; unite; bring together, as with two or more
loans.
CONSOLIDATED APPEAL if two or more persons are entitled to appeal
from a judgment or order of a district court, and their interests are such
as to make joinder practicable, they may file a joint notice of appeal, or
may join in appeal after filing separate notices of appeal, and they may
thereafter proceed on appeal as a single appellant. Appeals may be
consolidated by order of the court of appeals upon its own motion or
upon motion of a party, or by stipulation of the parties of the several
appeals.
CONSOLIDATED OMNIBUS BUDGET RECONCILIATION ACT
see affordable care act [COBRA].
CONSOLIDATION see merger.
CONSORTIUM the conjugal fellowship of husband and wife, and the
right of each to the aid of the other in every conjugal relation. A person
willfully interfering with this relation, depriving one spouse of the
consortium of the other, is liable in damages and may give rise to action
for alienation of affection. Loss of consortium can figure in action for
injury or wrongful death of a spouse. See conjugal rights.
CONSPIRACY a combination of two or more persons to commit an
unlawful act, or to commit a lawful act by unlawful means. A
conspiracy to injure another is an actionable tort; it may also be a
criminal offense. Compare accomplice.
CONSPIRATOR [COCONSPIRATOR] one involved in a conspiracy;
one who acts with another, or others, in furtherance of an unlawful
transaction. See accessory. Compare principal.
CONSTITUTION the fundamental principles of law by which a
government is created and a country is administered. In Western
democratic theory, a mandate from the people in their sovereign
capacity, concerning how they shall be governed. Distinguished from a
statute, which is a rule decided by legislative representatives and is
subject to limitations of the Constitution.
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT[S] individual liberties granted by the State
or Federal Constitutions and protected from governmental interference.
CONSTRUCTION an interpretation of something not totally clear. To
determine construction of a statute or constitution is to decide the
meaning of an ambiguous part of it.
LIBERAL [EQUITABLE] CONSTRUCTION a liberal construction expands the
meaning of a statute or provision to give broad effect to its purposes so
as to encompass circumstances clearly within the spirit if not the letter
of the statute. Statutes which are intended to be remedial in purpose are
generally accorded a liberal construction so as to meet the evils which
the statute was intended to remedy.
STRICT [LITERAL] CONSTRUCTION a conservative or literal interpretation
of statutes, stressing rigid adherence to terms specified.
CONSTRUCTIVE not actual, but accepted in law as a substitute for
whatever is otherwise required. Thus, anything the law finds to exist
constructively will be treated by the law as though it were actually so.
CONSTRUCTIVE BAILMENT see bailment [CONSTRUCTIVE
BAILMENT].
CONSTRUCTIVE BREACH see breach [CONSTRUCTIVE BREACH].
CONSTRUCTIVE CONTEMPT see contempt of court [CONSTRUCTIVE
CONTEMPT].
CONSTRUCTIVE DELIVERY see delivery [CONSTRUCTIVE DELIVERY].
CONSTRUCTIVE EVICTION see eviction [CONSTRUCTIVE EVICTION].
CONSTRUCTIVE FRAUD see fraud [CONSTRUCTIVE [LEGAL] FRAUD].
CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE see notice [CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE].
CONSTRUCTIVE POSSESSION see possession [CONSTRUCTIVE
POSSESSION].
CONSTRUCTIVE RECEIPT OF INCOME see income [CONSTRUCTIVE
RECEIPT OF INCOME].
CONSTRUCTIVE SERVICE see service (of process) [SERVICE BY
PUBLICATION].
CONSTRUCTIVE TRUST see trust [CONSTRUCTIVE [INVOLUNTARY]
TRUST].
CONSTRUE to interpret a statute, case, regulation, treaty, or other legal
authority.
CONSUMER in economics, an individual who buys goods and services for
personal use rather than for manufacture. It has been said that the
consumer is the last person to whom property passes in the course of
ownership and that this is the test of a retail transaction.
CONSUMER GOODS goods that are used or bought for use primarily for
personal, family, or household purposes. “Consumer goods” is one of
four categories of goods distinguished by the Uniform Commercial
Code. The classifications are important for such purposes as
determining the rights of persons who buy goods subject to a security
interest, rights after a default, and rights among those with conflicting
security interests in the same collateral. Thus, consumer goods are to be
distinguished from EQUIPMENT, which are goods used or bought for use
primarily in business; from FARM PRODUCTS, which are goods in the
possession of one engaged in a farming operation if they are crops or
livestock or supplies used or produced in farming operations or if they
are products of crops or livestock in their unmanufactured states and
from INVENTORY, which are goods held for sale. The classification of
goods is determined by its primary use.
CONSUMER PROTECTION refers to laws designed to aid retail
consumers of goods and services that have been improperly
manufactured, delivered, performed, handled, or described. Such laws
provide the retail consumer with additional protections and remedies not
generally provided to merchants and others who engage in business
transactions, on the premise that consumers do not enjoy an “arm’slength” bargaining position with respect to the businesspeople with
whom they deal and therefore should not be strictly limited by the legal
rules that govern recovery for damages among businesspeople.
EXAMPLE: Harry contracted with a company to put aluminum siding on
his house. The company transfers the contract to a finance agency and
receives the amount Harry had agreed to pay the company, less a small
discount so that the finance agency can make a profit on the transfer.
Under basic commercial law, if the company does not perform the work
satisfactorily, Harry will still have to pay the finance agency, because
that area of law protects the agency [as a holder in due course] from
claims against the company once the agency assumes the contract. But
under some states’ consumer protection laws, the finance agency must
take responsibility for the company’s work.
CONTACTS APPROACH see conflict of laws.
CONTACT, SEXUAL see rape [SEXUAL CONTACT].
CONTEMPLATION OF DEATH see causa [CAUSA MORTIS].
CONTEMPT OF COURT an act or omission tending to interfere with
orderly administration of justice, or to impair the dignity of the court or
respect for its authority. DIRECT CONTEMPT takes place openly and in the
presence of the court. CONSTRUCTIVE CONTEMPT occurs outside the
court; an example is failure to comply with court orders.
CIVIL CONTEMPT consists of failure to do something ordered by the
court for the benefit of another party to the proceedings (sometimes
called RELIEF TO LITIGANTS); CRIMINAL CONTEMPT includes acts
disrespectful of the court or its processes that obstruct administration of
justice.
EXAMPLE: A judge orders a litigant to disclose several important
documents to his adversary. The litigant refuses because he feels that
the documents will give away trade secrets. The court has certain
formulas and designs deleted, and orders that the documents be
relinquished. If the litigant still refuses, he can be held in contempt of
court, resulting in a jail sentence and/or a fine. The nature of the
sanction is within the trial judge’s discretion. As a general legal
proposition, an order of a court must be obeyed or appealed. It may not
be disregarded.
CONTIGUOUS adjacent, connected.
CONTINGENT BENEFICIARY one who will receive the benefit or
proceeds of an estate, trust, life insurance policy or the like but only if
some particular event or circumstance, whose happening or outcome is
not presently known or assured, does in fact occur.
EXAMPLE: A husband establishes a trust to take effect at his death and
names his wife as beneficiary. The trust instrument also provides that if
the wife should remarry, the husband’s son and daughter become the
beneficiaries and the wife is no longer eligible to take under the trust.
Since there is no assurance that the wife will ever remarry, the son and
daughter are considered contingent beneficiaries.
CONTINGENT ESTATE [INTEREST] an interest or estate in land that
might or might not begin in the future, depending upon occurrence of a
specific but uncertain event or depending on the determination or
existence of the person[s] to whom the estate is limited. Compare
conditional fee; future interest.
EXAMPLE: The brother grants land to Janet until she dies and then
provides that the land go to Xavier’s children. Xavier has no children at
this time, so the grant of the land to them following Janet’s death is a
contingent estate. If Xavier has no children when Janet dies, the title to
the land reverts back to the brother (who first granted it).
CONTINGENT FEE a charge made by an attorney for services rendered
to his or her client, recovery of which depends upon a successful
outcome of the case. The amount is often agreed to be a percentage of
the client’s recovery. Such fee arrangements are often used in
negligence cases, but it is unethical for an attorney to charge a criminal
defendant a fee contingent upon the result. See attorney’s fee.
CONTINGENT LIABILITY a liability that will not accrue unless facts or
circumstances that are not certain to occur do in fact occur at some
future time. For instance, in a contract to sell a business, the seller will
incur a contingent liability if he or she agrees to refund some or all of
the purchase price in the event that the purchaser is sued for the seller’s
negligent acts in operating the business.
CONTINUANCE the adjournment or postponement, to a specified
subsequent date, of an action pending in a court.
CONTRA (kôn’-tra*) Lat.: against. In opposition to; in violation of; the
reverse of.
CONTRABAND any property, the possession or transportation of which is
illegal. For instance, narcotic drugs, firearms, counterfeit money, or
untaxed cigarettes that an individual intends to illegally distribute or use
are contraband.
CONTRA BONOS MORES (kôn’-traW bo@’-no@s mô’-ra@z) Lat.: against good
morals. Refers to conduct that offends the average conscience and
commonly accepted standards.
CONTRACT a promise, for the breach of which the law provides a
remedy, or the performance of which the law recognizes as a duty; a
transaction involving two or more individuals whereby each has
reciprocal rights to demand performance of what is promised.
ADHESION CONTRACT see adhesion contract.
ALEATORY CONTRACT see aleatory [ALEATORY CONTRACT].
BILATERAL CONTRACT one in which there are mutual promises between
two parties, each being both a promisor and a promisee.
CONDITIONAL CONTRACT a contract whose performance depends upon a
future event; e.g., a contract to purchase a car if it passes a motor
vehicle inspection.
EXAMPLE: Glen wants to purchase a large tract of land from seller to
build a manufacturing plant but is unsure whether he can get a loan
from the bank to finance the construction costs. Therefore, he signs a
conditional contract with the seller that he will purchase the land only if
he obtains a construction loan from the bank.
CONTRACT OF ADHESION see adhesion contract.
CONTRACT OF HAZARD see sale [SALE IN GROSS].
CONTRACT UNDER SEAL see SPECIAL CONTRACT (below). See also sealed
instrument; specialty.
COST-PLUS CONTRACT one providing that the contractor receives
payment of his or her total costs, plus a stated percentage or profit.
FORMAL CONTRACT see sealed instrument.
FREEDOM OF CONTRACT see freedom of contract.
IMPLIED CONTRACT see QUASI [IMPLIED] CONTRACT (below).
INSTALLMENT CONTRACT see installment contract.
OPTION CONTRACT see option contract.
ORAL CONTRACT one that is not in writing or that is not signed by the
parties.
OUTPUT CONTRACT one whereby a party promises to deliver his or her
entire output to another and the other promises to accept the entire
output supplied.
QUASI CONTRACT see quasi [QUASI CONTRACT].
REQUIREMENTS CONTRACT one whereby a party agrees to purchase all
his or her requirements of a particular product from another, and the
other agrees to supply the need.
SEVERABLE CONTRACT see severable contract.
SIMPLE CONTRACT see sealed instrument [SIMPLE CONTRACT].
SPECIAL CONTRACT a contract under seal; a specialty. See sealed
instrument. See also adhesion contract; breach (of contract); privity
[PRIVITY OF CONTRACT]; retail installment contract; tender; usurious
contract; yellow dog contract.
UNILATERAL CONTRACT agreement whereby one makes a promise to do,
or refrain from doing, something in return for an actual performance by
the other, rather than a mere promise of performance.
CONTRACT OF ADHESION see adhesion contract.
CONTRACT OF HAZARD see sale [SALE IN GROSS].
CONTRACTOR l. a party to a contract; 2. one who contracts to do work
for another. An INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR makes an agreement to do a
specific piece of work, retaining control of the means and method of
doing the job; neither party has the right to terminate the contract at
will. A GENERAL BUILDING CONTRACTOR contracts directly with the
owner of the property upon which the construction occurs, as
distinguished from a SUBCONTRACTOR, who would deal only with one of
the general contractors.
CONTRACTUAL BREACH see breach (of contract).
CONTRACT UNDER SEAL see sealed instrument.
CONTRA PACEM (ko*n’-traW pä’-ke*m) Lat.: against the peace. Used in
Latin forms of indictments, and also in actions for trespass, to signify
that the alleged offense was committed against the public peace.
CONTRIBUTION 1. sharing, by another person jointly responsible for
injury to a third person, of the amount required to compensate the
victim. One who is partly responsible for an injury is often entitled to
demand contribution from another who is also responsible. The duty
generally involves equal sharing of the penalty, but in some
jurisdictions it may be apportioned among the joint tortfeasors
according to degree of fault. Compare indemnity; 2. In tax law, a tax
deductible contribution is a DONATION.
CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTION a contribution for the use of a state, the
United States, or a NOT-FOR-PROFIT CORPORATION (see corporation)
organized exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, or
educational purposes.
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE see negligence [CONTRIBUTORY
NEGLIGENCE]
CONTROLLED CORPORATION see corporation [CONTROLLED
CORPORATION].
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE a drug whose general availability is
restricted; any substance that is strictly regulated or outlawed because of
its potential for abuse or addiction. Controlled substances include
narcotics, stimulants, depressants, hallucinogens, and cannabis.
CONTROVERSY a dispute. In constitutional law, in order to constitute a
“case or controversy” sufficient to permit an adjudication by the court,
a controversy must be real, not one inquiring what the law would be in a
hypothetical situation. See standing. Compare advisory opinion. See
also justiciable; separable controversy.
CONTUMACY willful disobedience to the summons or orders of a court;
overt defiance of authority. Contumacious conduct may result in a
finding of contempt of court.
CONVERSATION, CRIMINAL see alienation of affections.
CONVERSION a tort consisting of deprivation of another’s property
without authorization and without justification.
EXAMPLE: Ralph steals a check made payable to Overland Corporation
and cashes it at his bank. Ralph is guilty of theft, which by definition
includes conversion. But, in most instances, the bank is also guilty of
conversion. It has contributed to the unauthorized taking of the check by
giving Ralph cash even though the check was not made out to him.
Absent complicity in the theft, the bank is not criminally liable, unlike
Ralph. The bank is, however, monetarily liable to Overland
Corporation.
CONVERTIBLE SECURITIES bonds and preferred stock that can be
exchanged for common stock or other lesser security usually of the
same corporation. Terms of the exchange specify the exchange ratio
and expiration of the right to exchange.
CONVEY in real property law, to transfer property from one to another,
by means of a written instrument and other formalities. Compare
alienation. See also grant.
CONVEYANCE see convey.
CONVICT 1. one who has been determined by the court to be guilty of the
crime charged; 2. to determine such guilt.
CONVICTION the result of a legal proceeding in which the guilt of a
party is ascertained and upon which sentence or judgment is founded.
The confession of an accused in open court or a verdict that ascertains
and publishes the fact of guilt are both sufficient to constitute a
conviction. See guilty.
COOPERATIVE [CO-OP] see condominium [COOPERATIVE].
COOPERATIVE ASSOCIATION a union of individuals, commonly
laborers, farmers, or small capitalists, formed for the pursuit in common
of a productive enterprise, the profits being shared in proportion to the
capital or labor contributed by each.
COORDINATE JURISDICTION see jurisdiction [CONCURRENT
JURISDICTION].
COPARCENARY at common law, the estate of two or more females
inherited from a common ancestor in default of male heirs. The rights of
coparceners were in the nature of a joint tenancy in that they could sue
and be sued jointly in regards to the property, but were in the nature of a
tenancy in common in that no right of survivorship existed.
COPARCENERS persons who, by virtue of descent, have become
concurrent owners. See parcener.
EXAMPLE: Beth and Nathan were left a summer home by their father. As
a result of that devise, the two are coparceners.
COPARTNER see partner.
COPY, CONFORMED see conformed copy.
COPYHOLD a medieval form of land tenure in England. A copyhold was
a parcel of land granted to a peasant by a lord in return for agricultural
services. The transaction was recorded on the rolls of the manor by the
steward, who gave the tenant an authenticated copy of the recordation.
Transfer of lands held by copyhold was achieved by surrender and
admittance; that is, the copyholder surrendered his land to the baronial
court and the steward admitted the person designated by the previous
holder to the land by recording the transfer on the rolls and issuing a
copy to the new tenant. Tenure was at the will of the lord, but in time
the custom of the manor arising over many years gave the tenant a
degree of security against arbitrary action by the lord. Thus, copyhold,
though not originally entitling the holder to the absolute ownership
characteristic of a freehold estate, came to represent a form of
permanent tenure with rights of descent and alienability, while money
rents or symbolic consideration were substituted for agricultural
services. Copyhold was abolished in England in 1926.
Also used to refer generally to any form of land tenure other than a
freehold.
COPYRIGHT protection by statute or by the common law, giving authors
and artists exclusive right to publish their works or to determine who
may so publish. When by statute, copyright is exclusively a matter of
federal law.
COMMON-LAW COPYRIGHT a protection that exists before a work is
published or otherwise placed in the public domain; protects against
unauthorized publication of the unpublished work; also called RIGHT OF
FIRST PUBLICATION.
COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT the offense of unauthorized use of a work
protected by copyright. See plagiarism.
CORAM NOBIS, WRIT OF see writ of coram nobis.
CORESPONDENT see adultery. Another meaning is a co-respondent (a
co-party who responds to an appeal or a petition.) Finally, compare the
spelling and meanings of correspondent.
CORONER a public official who investigates the causes and
circumstances of suspicious deaths that occur within his or her
jurisdiction and makes a finding in a coroner’s inquest. See also post
mortem.
CORPORAL PUNISHMENT punishment inflicted upon the body. The
term may or may not include imprisonment; often serves simply to
distinguish physical punishment from nonphysical punishment, such as
a fine.
CORPORATE OPPORTUNITY the legal doctrine that directors or
others invested with a fiduciary duty toward a corporation may not
appropriate for their own benefit a business opportunity properly
belonging to the corporation. Persons found guilty of this practice are
deemed to hold the property or profits thus obtained in CONSTRUCTIVE
TRUST (see trust) for the benefit of the corporation, and injunctive
relief as well as money damages may be available to the victimized
shareholders. See conflict of interests; insider.
CORPORATE POWER see power, corporate.
CORPORATION an association of shareholders (or a single shareholder)
created under law as an ARTIFICAL PERSON, having a legal entity
separate from the individuals who compose it, with the capacity of
continuous existence or succession, and the capacity of taking, holding,
and conveying property, suing and being sued, and exercising, like a
natural person, other powers that are conferred on it by law. A
corporation’s liability is normally limited to its assets; the shareholders
are thus protected against personal liability for the corporation. The
corporation is taxed at special tax rates, and the stockholders must pay
an additional tax upon dividends or other profits from the corporation.
Corporations are subject to regulation by the state of incorporation and
by the jurisdictions in which they carry on their business.
Special statutes have been enacted in many jurisdictions to permit
single individuals or closely knit small groups of individuals to form
CLOSE CORPORATIONS to limit their personal liability but to carry on
business without the formality of annual meetings and action by boards
of directors.
EXAMPLE: Yancey runs several clothing shops as a sole proprietor. After
speaking with other businesspeople, he decides to form a close
corporation. Under that arrangement, Yancey still controls the company,
although there may be others, such as a wife and siblings, who hold a
number of shares of stock in the corporation. He also enjoys the limited
liability aspect of a corporation in that, if the corporation owes money, a
creditor will be limited to the assets of the corporation.
A small corporation with limited earnings may elect to be taxed as an
ordinary partnership; its stockholders thus enjoy limited personal
liability and only individual (not also corporate) taxation. A corporation
electing this federal income tax option is a SUBCHAPTER S CORPORATION.
ACQUIRED CORPORATION a corporation which has been the target of a
successful acquisition attempt.
ACQUIRING CORPORATION the corporation seeking to acquire the target
corporation.
AFFILIATED CORPORATION generally applied to any member of an
affiliated group of corporations related through common ownership.
BROTHER-SISTER CORPORATION two or more corporations having a
common parent corporation.
CONTROLLED CORPORATION a corporation which is deemed to be
controlled by another entity or individual who satisfies certain control
requirements relating to stock ownership. Control is usually established
by voting rights; for some purposes, however, it can be defined by the
relative fair market value of a shareholder’s stock.
DE FACTO CORPORATION one existing in fact, but without actual
authority of law.
EXAMPLE: Flange Brothers, a partnership, decides to incorporate. After
filing what they believe are the necessary papers, the partnership
changes it name to Flange Corporation and continues to carry on its
business. Several years later, a creditor sues both the corporation and the
partners who run it claiming that the partners are not protected from
personal liability because they failed to file certain papers for
incorporation and a corporation, therefore, was never legally formed.
Unless the omission was intentional or under other rare circumstances, a
court will generally find that the error was inadvertent, a de facto
corporation was formed, and the persons running the corporation are
protected from liability.
MEMBER CORPORATION see member corporation.
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION see municipal corporation.
NONSTOCK CORPORATION see nonstock corporation.
NOT-FOR-PROFIT CORPORATION one organized for some charitable, civil,
social or other purpose that does not entail the generating of profit or the
distribution of its income to members, principals, shareholders, officers
or others affiliated with it. Such corporations are accorded special
treatment under the law for some purposes, including federal income
taxation.
PROFESSIONAL CORPORATION see professional corporation.
PRIVATE CORPORATION the common corporation, created by and for
private individuals for nongovernmental purposes.
PUBLIC [POLITICAL] CORPORATIONS those created by the state to fulfill
certain purposes, such as to form lesser governmental bodies (towns,
cities), organize school districts, operate water districts. QUASI
CORPORATION a body that exercises certain functions of a corporate
character, but that has not been established as a corporation by any
statute.
S CORPORATION a small corporation which elects to be taxed as a
partnership for federal income taxation purposes. Prior to 1982 these
entities were called SUBCHAPTER S CORPORATIONS. The number of
shareholders is limited; individual shareholders enjoy the benefits under
state law of limited corporate liability but avoid corporate federal
taxation.
SHELL CORPORATION a company that is incorporated but has few or no
assets and no real business. Such corporations are formed for the
purpose of going public and later acquiring existing businesses or
obtaining financing. Also a term for a truly nonexistent corporation used
for tax evasion purposes.
TARGET CORPORATION a corporation which is the subject of an
acquisition attempt.
CORPOREAL having material reality; opposite of INCORPOREAL,
intangible.
CORPOREAL HEREDITAMENT see hereditaments.
CORPUS (kôr’-pu*s) Lat.: body. The main substance of a thing. 1. The
principal or res of an estate, trust, devise or bequest from which
income is derived; can consist of funds, real estate or other tangible or
intangible property.
EXAMPLE: Sean creates a trust naming his children as beneficiaries. An
office building is stated to be the trust corpus in the trust instrument.
The rents collected from the building’s tenants constitute the income
that is distributed to the children.
2. In civil law, corpus refers to a positive fact as distinguished from a
possibility. See corpus delicti.
CORPUS DELICTI (kôr’-pu*s de*-lĭk’-tῑ) Lat.: body of the crime. The
objective proof that a crime has been committed; sometimes refers to
the body of the victim of a homicide, but the term has a broader
meaning. For the state to introduce a confession or convict the accused
it must prove a corpus delicti; i.e., the occurrence of specific injury or
loss and a criminal act as the source of the loss. See moral certainty.
EXAMPLE: At his trial for murder, Qiang asks the court to dismiss his
prosecution because no body was ever found. He does not prevail on
that theory alone. Although there is no body, the state can still prove a
corpus delicti. It is possible to prove a murder by showing that the
person has not been seen for several years, that items of particular
importance which had belonged to the person were found in Qiang’s
house, and that a knife with bloodstains matching the blood type of the
person was found in Qiang’s car. It should be observed that corpus
delicti is not related exclusively to homicide. The corpus delicti of a
robbery is the stolen money.
CORPUS JURIS (kôr’-pu*s ju@r’-is) Lat.: body of law. A series of texts
containing much of the civil and canon [ecclesiastical] law.
CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION a general term used to describe a jail,
prison, reformatory or other government-maintained detention facility.
CORRESPONDENT 1. a financial or other institution that has regular
business relations with another distant but similar institution; 2. a person
who engages in written communication with another; 3. consistent;
similar; equivalent; fitting. Compare the spelling and meaning of
corespondent.
CORROBORATING EVIDENCE evidence complementary to evidence
already given and tending to strengthen or confirm it; additional
evidence of a different character on the same point.
CORRUPTION OF THE BLOOD incapacity to inherit or pass property,
usually because of attainder, such as for treason. A doctrine of feudal
origin stated that the blood of the attained person was deemed to be
corrupt, so that neither could he or she transmit his or her estate to
heirs, nor could the heirs take by descent from their ancestors. This
doctrine has been constitutionally abolished in the United States.
COSIGN the act of affixing one’s signature in addition to the principal
signature of another in order to verify the authenticity of the principal
signature.
COSIGNER see comakers [COSIGNER].
COST DEPLETION see depletion [COST DEPLETION].
COST, INSURANCE, AND FREIGHT see CIF
COST OF COMPLETION in a breach of contract situation, a measure
of damages representing the total amount of additional expense, over
and above the contract price, that the injured party would have to incur
in order to obtain a substituted performance that would place that party
in the same position he or she would have been in if the contract had not
been breached. Often used as a measure of damages for breaches of
construction contracts. Compare diminution in value; expectation
damages; specific performance.
COST OF GOODS SOLD see income statement [COST OF GOODS SOLD];
inventory [COST OF GOODS SOLD].
COST OF LIVING ADJUSTMENT automatic adjustments to Social
Security and Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits, as well as
some pension plans, to maintain purchasing power that is not eroded by
inflation. Adjustments are based on a complicated formula derived from
the Consumer Price Index.
COST OF LIVING CLAUSE in a long-term contract, a clause that adjusts
the price paid for the goods or services received in an amount equal to
the change in the cost of living. For instance, in a lease of commercial
property, the contract often provides that the rent will be increased once
a year in an amount equal to the rise in the consumer price index for the
area, published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
COST-PLUS CONTRACT see contract [COST-PLUS CONTRACT].
COSTS court expenses of the victorious party in a lawsuit and that may be
reimbursed by the losing party as part of recovery. Such an allowance is
therefore incidental to judgment and compensates for the expense of
asserting one’s rights in court. Costs may be allowed to the plaintiff if
the default of a defendant made it necessary to sue, and to a defendant
if the plaintiff sued without cause. Generally, costs of litigation are
recoverable as of right if provided by statute. If there is no applicable
statute, court rules may provide for allowance of costs to be at the
discretion of the trial court. However, pursuant to the American rule,
the prevailing practice in most jurisdictions is that each party bears his
or her own costs.
COSTS TO ABIDE THE EVENT court order requiring the losing party to
pay legal expenses of the prevailing party up to and including the
decision of the court of appeals (see appellate court) and sometimes on
retrial.
COTENANCY possession of and the holding of rights in a unit of property
by two or more persons simultaneously. The term does not describe the
estate, but the relationship between persons who share the property. It
encompasses TENANCY IN COMMON, JOINT TENANCY, and TENANCY BY
THE ENTIRETY (see tenancy).
COUNSEL [COUNSELOR] 1. attorney, lawyer, legal adviser; 2. the
advice or aid given with respect to a legal matter; 3. In criminal law, the
term may refer to the advising or encouraging of another to commit a
crime.
COUNSEL SUBSTITUTE see advocate [COUNSEL SUBSTITUTE].
COUNT a distinct statement of plaintiff’s cause of action. In indictments,
a count, like a charge, is an allegation of a distinct offense. A
complaint or indictment may contain one or more counts.
COUNTERCLAIM a counterdemand by defendant against the plaintiff;
it is not a mere answer or denial of plaintiff’s allegation, but asserts an
independent cause of action in favor of defendant.
EXAMPLE: A retail store owner sues a manufacturer for a shipment of
defective clocks. Regardless of the validity of that suit, the
manufacturer could counterclaim against the store owner if, for
example, the owner owed the manufacturer money for past shipments.
Both the storeowner’s and the manufacturer’s claims would then be
decided by the courts.
In federal practice, a COMPULSORY COUNTERCLAIM arises out of the
subject matter of the opposing party’s claims, and unless the defendant
makes such a counterclaim in the suit that has been brought against him
or her, he or she may be barred from ever raising that claim again. A
PERMISSIVE COUNTERCLAIM is any other counterclaim and may be made
by the defendant in the action that has been brought against him or her
or in a subsequent suit. See setoff. Compare cross-claim.
COUNTERFEIT forged; fabricated without right; made in imitation of
something else to defraud by passing the false copy for genuine.
COUPLED WITH AN INTEREST see authority [AUTHORITY COUPLED
WITH AN INTEREST].
COUPONS certificates, usually attached to an instrument evidencing a
loan, which may be presented separately for payment of a specific sum
representing interest on the main instrument. See bond [BEARER BOND].
COURSE OF BUSINESS see ordinary course of business.
COURSE OF DEALING see trade usage [COURSE OF DEALING].
COURT the branch of government responsible for the resolution of
disputes arising under the laws of government. A court system is
usually divided into various parts that specialize in hearing different
types of cases. Trial courts receive evidence and make initial
determinations of fact and law that may then be reviewed by appellate
courts. Trial courts are usually divided into CIVIL COURTS, which hear
disputes arising under the common law and civil statutes, CRIMINAL
COURTS, which hear prosecutions under the criminal laws,
MATRIMONIAL COURTS, which hear divorce proceedings, and
SURROGATE’S COURTS, which hear proceedings regarding the estates of
deceased and incompetent persons. Federal courts hear cases arising
under federal laws. All states have a separate court system to decide
cases arising under state laws. See court of claims; court of equity;
court of law; de facto [DE FACTO COURT]; district court; drug court;
federal courts; inferior court; international court of justice;
juvenile courts; kangaroo court; moot court; open court; probate
[PROBATE COURT]; small claims court; supreme court; tax court;
term of court; territorial court; trial court.
COURT CALENDAR a schedule of cases awaiting disposition in a given
court, also referred to as the TRIAL LIST or the COURT DOCKET.
COURT EN BANC see en banc.
COURT-MARTIAL l. a military or naval tribunal with jurisdiction over
offenses against the law of the service in which the offender is engaged;
2. a proceeding in such a court. (plural: courts-martial).
GENERAL COURT-MARTIAL one presided over by a law officer and not
fewer than five members, having jurisdiction over all members of the
armed services of which it is a part, and authorized to try defendants for
all military offenses and to prescribe any permitted sanctions.
SPECIAL COURT-MARTIAL one presided over by three members, that may
try all noncapital offenses and that is limited in its authority to prescribe
sanctions such as dismissal, hard labor and extended confinement, but
may not authorize execution.
SUMMARY COURT-MARTIAL one presided over by a single commissioned
officer, and limited in respect to the military personnel over whom it has
jurisdiction and the sanctions it may prescribe. The accused may refuse
trial by a summary court-martial, but the charges may then be referred
to a higher level court-martial.
COURT OF APPEALS see appellate [appeals] court. Also the name of
Maryland’s and New York’s highest state court.
COURT OF ASSIZE AND NISI PRIUS an English law court composed
of two or more commissioners, who were sent twice in every year by
the king’s special commission all around the kingdom to try by jury
cases under their jurisdiction.
COURT OF CLAIMS the court of the United States, created to determine
all presented claims founded upon any law of Congress, upon any
regulation of an executive department, or upon any contract, express or
implied, with the government of the United States, and also all claims
that may be referred to the court by either house of Congress. It has no
power over matters in equity. See Federal Claims Court.
COURT OF CUSTOMS AND PATENT APPEALS see federal courts.
COURT OF EQUITY a court having jurisdiction in cases where an
adequate and complete remedy cannot be had at law. Courts of equity in
common law developed their own principles and unique remedies (e.g.,
injunction, specific performance). Actions were brought either
equitably in chancery or legally at law. Today, courts that are guided
primarily by equitable doctrine are still said to be courts of equity. Thus,
a bankruptcy court is a court of equity. Courts of equity, which arose
independent of courts of law in England, have merged with the latter in
most jurisdictions of the United States. See equity.
COURT OF EXCHEQUER (e*ks’-che*k-eWr) an ancient English court of
record. It was established by William the Conqueror to recover the
king’s debts and duties. It was inferior to both the court of the King’s
Bench and the court of common pleas, but served as both a court of
law and equity. It took its name from the chequered cloth that covered
its table and was marked and scored when the king’s accounts were
prepared. It consisted of two divisions, one that handled the royal
revenue and the court, which was subdivided into courts of equity and
common law.
THE COURT OF EXCHEQUER CHAMBER a court of appeal established to
determine causes upon writs of error from the common law side of the
court of exchequer.
COURT OF INQUIRY see military law [MILITARY COURT OF INQUIRY].
COURT OF KING’S [QUEEN’S] BENCH see King’s [Queen’s] Bench.
COURT OF LAW a tribunal with jurisdiction over cases at law. The
term applies to courts that administer justice according to federal or
state law or common law, as distinguished from courts that follow the
principles of equity and are called chancery courts. Law courts and
equity courts, however, are generally no longer distinguished, and a
court of law is any tribunal administering the law.
COURT OF MILITARY APPEAL see military law [COURT OF MILITARY
APPEAL].
COURT OF MILITARY REVIEW see military law [COURT OF MILITARY
REVIEW].
COURT OF RECORD a court that, like most modern courts, is required
by law to keep a record of its proceedings, including the orders and
judgments it enters, and that has the authority to imprison and to levy
fines.
COURT OF STAR CHAMBER see star chamber.
COURT REPORTERS persons certified to operate tape-recording devices
or to use shorthand or stenographic means to record that which is said in
court or at a deposition. The recording is later turned into a transcript
and forms the official record of the proceeding. Contemporaneous
transcripts made by computer systems and that are viewable by persons
in the courtroom are known as REAL TIME or LIVE VIEW transcripts.
COURT REPORTS see advance sheets; reports.
COVENANT 1. to enter a formal agreement; to bind oneself in contract;
to make a stipulation; 2. an agreement to do or not to do a particular
thing; 3. a promise incidental to a deed or contract, either express or
implied.
EXAMPLE: Rita wants to sell a large tract of land adjacent to her home. As
an inducement to Salman, the buyer, Rita is willing to covenant with
(i.e., promise) him that he has access to and use of her driveway so that
he will not have to build one.
CONCURRENT COVENANTS those that require the performance by one
party of his or her obligation, when the other party is ready and offers
performance.
COVENANT NOT TO COMPETE see covenant not to compete.
DEPENDENT COVENANTS those in which the obligation to perform one
covenant arises only upon the prior performance of another; therefore,
until the prior condition of performance has been met, the other party is
not liable in an action on his covenant.
INDEPENDENT [MUTUAL] COVENANTS those that must be performed by
one party without reference to the obligations of the other party.
In deeds, the usual COVENANTS OF TITLE, which may be deemed by
law to be a part of certain kinds of real property conveyances, include:
COVENANT AGAINST ACTS OF THE GRANTOR one often inserted into a
bargain and sale deed to assure that the grantor has not done, nor
caused to be done, any act by means of which the premises or any part
thereof may be encumbered in any way.
COVENANT AGAINST ENCUMBRANCES a guarantee given to the grantee of
an estate that the estate is without encumbrances. Compare run with
the land.
COVENANT OF FURTHER ASSURANCE one that obligates the covenantor to
perform whatever acts are reasonably demanded by the covenantee for
the purpose of perfecting or assuring the title that is conveyed. This
type of covenant is no longer in general use.
COVENANT OF HABITABILITY see warranty [WARRANTY OF
HABITABILITY].
COVENANT OF QUIET ENJOYMENT see quiet enjoyment.
COVENANT OF SEISIN AND RIGHT TO CONVEY covenant that the grantor
has an estate, or the right to convey an estate, of the quality and
quantity that he or she purports to convey (which, in the case of a
covenant of seisin, is a fee simple).
COVENANT OF WARRANTY AND QUIET ENJOYMENT one that obligates the
covenantor to protect the estate against the existence of lawful claims of
ownership by third parties. A cause of action arises only when there is
eviction, actual or constructive.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANT see restrictive covenant.
COVENANTEE one who receives the covenant, or for whom it is made.
COVENANT NOT TO COMPETE a contractual promise to refrain from
conducting business or professional activities similar to those of another
party. These covenants are encountered principally in contracts of
employment, partnership, or sale of a business.
EXAMPLE: A chain of discount appliance stores is bought by a large
corporation. The corporation offers to hire Trent, the owner of the chain,
and to allow him to organize a separate business if he wants. The only
condition on the offer is that Trent sign a covenant not to compete,
which would prohibit Trent from organizing another chain of discount
appliance stores or selling any other merchandise this corporation
distributes. Ordinarily, such covenants have geographic and duration
limits, i.e., that for a period of three years Trent may not open a
competitive store within 50 miles of the chain he sold.
The protection of trade secrets, customer lists, business methods
specific to a particular employer, and the unique qualifications of the
employee have been held to constitute legitimate interests for protection
by covenants not to compete.
COVENANTOR one who makes a covenant.
COVER in commercial law, refers to a buyer’s purchase on the open
market of goods similar or identical to the goods contracted for after a
seller has breached a contract of sale by failure to deliver the goods
contracted for. Under the Uniform Commercial Code, after a seller
breaches and the buyer covers, the buyer is entitled to the difference
between the cost of the substitute goods and the original contract price,
provided the buyer has acted in good faith and without unreasonable
delay in effecting such cover.
EXAMPLE: Phil contracts with the Prime Leather Company to supply him
with raw leather hides at a certain price. By the delivery date, the cost of
hides has risen so sharply that Prime would lose a considerable amount
of money if it ships the hides to Phil. Prime decides to breach the
contract. If Phil covers on this contract by purchasing the hides from
another company, he can sue Prime for the difference between his
purchase price with the new company and the price agreed to in the
contract with Prime.
COVERTURE in common law, the state of a married woman whereby the
existence of the wife was for many civil purposes merged with that of
her husband, particularly with regard to ownership of property.
CREDIBILITY whether or not a witness is being truthful. The primary
measure of credibility is whether the testimony is probable or
improbable when judged by common experience.
CREDIT 1. a privilege of delayed payment extended to a buyer or
borrower on the seller’s or lender’s belief that what is given will be
repaid; 2. in accounting, a credit represents money due.
CREDIT LINE a promised maximum amount of money made available to
a borrower by a bank or store merchant to allow for ongoing
transactions. Compare home equity line of credit [HELOC].
CREDIT CARD an indication to sellers of commodities that the person
who received the card from the issuer has a satisfactory credit rating and
that if credit is extended, the issuer of the card will pay (or see to it that
seller receives payment) for the merchandise delivered.
CREDITOR one to whom money is owed by the debtor; one to whom an
obligation exists. In its strict legal sense, a creditor is one who
voluntarily gives credit to another for money or other property; in its
more general sense it is one who has a right by law to demand and
recover of another a sum of money on any account. See judgment
creditor.
CREDITOR BENEFICIARY see third party beneficiary [CREDITOR
BENEFICIARY].
CREDITOR’S BILL [SUIT] a proceeding in equity in which a judgment
creditor (a creditor who has secured judgment against a debtor and
whose claim has not been satisfied) attempts to gain a discovery,
accounting and delivery of property owed to him or her by the
judgment debtor, which property cannot be reached by execution
(seizure and forced sale) at law.
CREDIT UNION see bank [CREDIT UNION].
CRIME a wrong that the government has determined is injurious to the
public and that may therefore be prosecuted in a criminal proceeding.
Crimes include felonies and misdemeanors. A common law crime was
one declared to be an offense by the developed case law of the common
law courts. Today all criminal offenses are exclusively statutory in
nearly every American jurisdiction. See infamous crime.
CRIME AGAINST NATURE sexual deviation, including sodomy and
bestiality, considered a crime in common law and carried over into
statutory law.
CRIME INVOLVING MORAL TURPITUDE [CIMT] see moral
turpitude.
CRIMEN FALSI (krĭ’-me*n fäl’-se@) Lat.: a crime of deceit. In common
law a crime involving falsehood and fraud. Having committed such a
crime generally disqualified a person as a witness in a judicial
proceeding. Examples of crimen falsi include forgery, perjury,
subornation of perjury, suppression of testimony, conspiracy in the
absence of a witness and fraudulent making or alteration of a document.
CRIME OF PASSION a crime committed under the influence of sudden
or extreme passion. That an act was committed in the heat of passion
may provide a defense to a charge of murder, since it negates the
element of premeditation, a necessary element of murder. See
manslaughter.
EXAMPLE: Nancy comes home and finds her husband in bed with another
lover. In a fit of rage she shoots both of them. Although Nancy is
charged with murder, she claims that the shootings were a crime of
passion. As part of her proof, she states that her act resulted from seeing
her husband in bed with someone else and not from a rational or
premeditated plan to kill, which would be required to support a first
degree murder conviction. If the jury accepts her claim she would be
convicted of the lesser-degree offense of manslaughter.
CRIME, ORGANIZED see organized crime; racketeering.
CRIMINAL 1. done with malicious intent, with a disposition to injure
persons or property; 2. one who has been convicted of a violation of the
criminal laws. A HABITUAL OFFENDER has been repeatedly convicted of
crimes and therefore is subject to extended imprisonment under the
habitual offender laws of many jurisdictions.
CRIMINAL CODE see penal law [code].
CRIMINAL COERCION the common law offense of extortion has been
broadened by modern statutes to encompass any person who, acting
with purpose to restrict unlawfully another’s freedom of action to his or
her detriment, threatens to commit any criminal offense, accuse anyone
of a criminal offense, expose any secret tending to subject any person to
hatred, contempt, or ridicule, impair his or her credit or business repute,
or threatens to take or withhold action as an official, or cause an official
to take or withhold action. Common law extortion was limited to the
corrupt collection of an unlawful fee by an officer acting under color of
office with no proof of threat, force, or duress required. If property is
obtained as the result of criminal coercion, the conduct then constitutes
theft by extortion since that form of theft encompasses today any
conduct that is now proscribed by the criminal coercion statute. See
coercion.
CRIMINAL CONTEMPT see contempt of court.
CRIMINAL CONVERSATION see alienation of affections.
CRIMINAL COURTS see court [CRIMINAL COURTS].
CRIMINALISTICS the science of crime detection, including DNA and
fingerprint technology and other laboratory analyses. See forensic.
CRIMINAL MAINTENANCE unauthorized interference in a lawsuit by
helping one party, with money or otherwise, to prosecute or defend a
cause of action so as to obstruct justice, promote unnecessary litigation
or unsettle community peace. Unlike champerty, criminal maintenance
does not necessarily involve personal profit. See also barratry.
CRIMINAL MISCHIEF a crime against property; the willful damaging of
the property of another. Punishable in a criminal court but may also be
dealt with as a civil tort. Such offenses may include throwing rocks
through windows, spray painting graffiti, slashing car tires, or other acts
of vandalism. Adding the element of personal ill will or hatred such as
defacing a Jewish cemetery with symbols of anti-Semitism raises the act
to a hate or bias crime, which has significantly higher levels of
punishment.
CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE see negligence [CRIMINAL [CULPABLE]
NEGLIGENCE].
CRIMINAL POSSESSION see possession [CRIMINAL POSSESSION].
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE see procedure [CRIMINAL PROCEDURE].
CRIMINAL RECORD a summary of an individual’s contacts with law
enforcement generally computerized in the NCIC. All arrests are noted
with an explanation of the result including convictions (and sentences
received), dismissals, not guilty verdicts, or bench warrant status.
Parole or probation violations and escapes are noted as well as alias
names, different dates of birth or social security numbers used,
fingerprint classification, race, and state and federal identification
numbers, Height, weight, eye and hair color, and identifying marks such
as scars or tattoos are included, but some of these factors are subject to
change. Also known as a RAP SHEET, the information is used by courts in
determining the appropriate punishment or bail, and by prison
authorities in determining minimum custody or job status.
CRIMINAL THREAT see threat [TERRORISTIC THREAT].
CROSS-BILL see bill [CROSS-BILL].
CROSS-CLAIM a claim litigated by codefendants or coplaintiffs against
each other, and not against a party on the opposite side of the litigation.
Compare counterclaim.
CROSS-EXAMINATION the questioning of a witness, by a party or
lawyer other than the one who called the witness, concerning matters
about which the witness has testified during DIRECT EXAMINATION. The
purpose is to discredit or clarify testimony already given so as to
neutralize damaging testimony or present facts in a light more favorable
to the party against whom the direct testimony was offered.
DIRECT EXAMINATION the initial questioning of a witness by the party
who called the witness. The purpose is to present testimony containing
the factual argument the party is making.
REDIRECT EXAMINATION the questioning of a witness by a party who
called the witness, which occurs after that witness has been subjected to
cross-examination. The purpose of redirect examination is to rebut or to
clarify any damaging testimony elicited on cross-examination.
CRUEL AND UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT a penalty tantamount to
torture, or excessive in proportion to the offense for which it is imposed,
or inherently unfair, or by contemporary standards shocking to people of
reasonable sensitivity. A punishment not inherently cruel and unusual
may become so by the manner in which it is inflicted. Such punishment
is prohibited by the Eighth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
CSAAS see child sexual abuse accommodation syndrome [CSAAS].
CTA see letters of administration [CTA].
CUCKOLD a man whose wife is unfaithful; the husband of an adulteress.
It is explained that the word alludes to the habit of the female cuckold,
which lays her eggs in the nests of other birds to be hatched by them. To
make a cuckold of a man is to seduce his wife.
CULPA (ku*l’-pa*) Lat: a term from the civil law meaning fault, neglect, or
negligence. Compare DOLUS, also from the civil law meaning fraud,
guile, or deceit.
CULPABLE deserving of moral blame or punishment; at fault; having
acted with indifference to consequences and to the rights of others.
CULPABLE MENTAL STATE the state of mind necessary to commit a
crime. In common law, both intent to commit a crime, called mens rea,
and the acts that constitute the crime were required to establish guilt.
EXAMPLE: After a long night drinking, Rod stumbles into what he
believes is his car and attempts to start the car with his own set of keys.
As it turns out, the car is not his, and the rightful owner, who comes out
seconds later, sees Rod and has him arrested for attempting to steal a
car. Rod argues that he did not have the culpable mental state required
for theft since he had no intention to steal the car.
See also negligence [CRIMINAL [CULPABLE] NEGLIGENCE].
CUM TESTAMENTO ANNEXO see letters of administration [CUM
TESTAMENTO ANNEXO].
CUMULATIVE DIVIDEND see dividend [CUMULATIVE DIVIDEND].
CUMULATIVE SENTENCE see sentence [CONSECUTIVE [CUMULATIVE]
SENTENCE].
CUMULATIVE VOTING a system of shareholder voting for a board of
directors, that allows all the votes an individual is eligible to cast to be
cast for a single candidate. The system is designed to give minority
shareholders representation on the board. For example, the owner of a
single share of stock voting in an election for five directors would be
able to cast one vote for each position under a straight voting system,
but would be able to cast all five votes for a single position or distribute
them in any manner desired under a cumulative voting system.
CUPOS census term meaning cohabiting unmarried person of the opposite
sex. The term POSSLQ “person of opposite sex sharing living quarters”
encompasses married and unmarried persons.
CURATIVE correcting a legal error or defect. A judge will give a curative
instruction to the jury to negate the effect of an erroneous instruction or
of tainted evidence. A curative statute is enacted to remedy a defect in
previously enacted legislation.
CURIA REGIS (ku@’-re@-aWra@’-gĭs) Lat.: the king’s court. See King’s Bench.
CURRENT ASSETS see asset; balance sheet.
CURRENT LIABILITIES debts incurred by the reporting entity as part of
normal operations and that are expected to be repaid during the
following twelve months. Examples are accounts payable, short-term
loans and that portion of long-term loans due in one year. See balance
sheet.
CURTESY the husband’s right in common law, upon the death of his wife,
to a life estate in all lands of which his wife was seised in fee simple or
in fee tail at any time during the marriage, provided that there was issue
born of the marriage capable of inheriting the estate. Compare dower.
CURTILAGE in common law the land around the dwelling house.
CUSTODY 1. as applied to property, the condition of holding a thing
within one’s personal care and control; 2. as applied to persons, such
control over a person as will insure his or her presence at a hearing, or
the actual imprisonment of a person resulting from a criminal
conviction; 3. Custody of children is legal guardianship.
CUSTODY OF CHILDREN the care and control of minor children
awarded by the court to one parent in a divorce proceeding. Where
parents both make application for JOINT CUSTODY, and circumstances
render the arrangement feasible, some courts have awarded custody to
both parents so that responsibility for the children is shared. Under a
joint custody order, each parent would assume custody of the children
for a fixed period, such as for six months or for the school year or for
the summer vacation.
CUSTOM DUTIES taxes imposed on the importation of foreign goods
into the United States. Custom duties and other restrictions are imposed
in order to regulate trade between the United States and other countries.
CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION [CBP] a federal law
enforcement agency under the Department of Homeland Security
with a priority mission of keeping terrorists and their weapons out of
the United States. Missions also include preventing the illegal entry of
people and goods while facilitating legitimate travel and trade.
Specifically, the CBP prevents persons, illicit drugs, and contraband
from entering the country illegally. It also protects American businesses
from intellectual property theft and provides agricultural inspection to
curtail harmful pests and diseases. See www.cbp.gov.
CUSTOMS COURT see federal courts.
CYBERLAW an evolving area of the law that deals with communications
technology involving e-commerce, copyright, First Amendment issues
(such as privacy and speech) and governmental regulations.
CYBERSQUATTING [CYBERPIRACY] the illegal practice of
registering a domain site (such as a company name) with the intention
of profiting by selling that domain name to the company to which it
rightfully belongs. Federal law prohibits such practices under the
ANTICYBERSQUATTING CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT. See also Digital
Millennium Copyright Act.
CYBERSTALKING actions by a user of a computer that harass, monitor,
or threaten another person and cause that person to be annoyed or
alarmed by the user’s conduct. See stalking.
CYPRÈS (sῑ’-pre*) Fr.: so near, as near. In the law of trusts and wills, the
principle that a court of equity will, when a charity bequest is illegal or
becomes impossible or impracticable, substitute another charitable
object that is believed to approach closely the original purpose of the
testator or settlor.
EXAMPLE: In her will, Ruth provided that $10,000 go to the Animal
Humanitarian Society for their work in placing lost or abandoned pets
and for running an animal hospital. At her death, the society no longer
existed. Under the doctrine of cyprès, the court awarded the $10,000 to
the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
D
D.A. abbreviation for District Attorney.
DAILY see per diem.
DAMAGE see injury; irreparable injury [damage; harm].
DAMAGES monetary compensation that the law awards to one who has
been injured by the action of another; monetary recompense for a legal
wrong such as a breach of contract or a tortious act. There are various
measures used for calculating damages, including diminution of value
and cost of completion. Compare specific performance.
ACTUAL [COMPENSATORY; GENERAL] DAMAGES losses directly referrable
to the breach or tortious act; losses that can readily be proven to have
been sustained, and for which the injured party should be compensated
as a matter of right.
COMPENSATORY DAMAGES see ACTUAL DAMAGES above.
CONSEQUENTIAL [SPECIAL] DAMAGES indirect loss or injury. In contract
law, consequential damages are recoverable if it was reasonably
foreseeable at the time of contract that the injury would probably result
if the contract were broken. The availability of award of such damages
depends upon the defaulting party’s actual or constructive knowledge
of conditions that make likely some special injury upon default. Special
damages should be distinguished from ACTUAL [GENERAL] DAMAGES,
which are presumed directly caused by the injury. Because special
damages do not necessarily flow from the injury, they must be specially
pleaded and proven. The distinction between special and general
damages is not absolute but, rather, is relative and depends upon the
circumstances of each case. For instance, in an action for failure to
provide widgets as agreed in a contract, the general damages would be
the price paid under the contract. Any claim for damages to business
reputation for reliability would be special damages. In an action for the
tort of interference with a business relationship, however, damage to the
business reputation would be the general damage. Under the UCC, in
order for a buyer to recover consequential damages resulting from a
seller’s breach, the damages must not have been avoidable by cover.
EXAMPLE: Crystal Lighting contracts with a construction company to
install unique light fixtures throughout a new building. On the basis of
that contract, Crystal also contracts with one of its suppliers to have
several hundred fixtures delivered to Crystal. Since this is not a normal
order for Crystal, Crystal explains what all the fixtures are for. The
supplier then breaches his contract. Ordinary light fixtures do not fit in
the building design. Any damages in the contract between Crystal and
the construction company that result from the breach are the direct
foreseeable result of the supplier’s breach. As such, those damages are
called consequential damages.
DOUBLE [TREBLE] DAMAGES twice [or three times] the amount of
damages that a court or jury would normally award, recoverable for
certain kinds of injuries pursuant to a statute authorizing the double [or
treble] recovery. These damages are intended in certain instances as
punishment for improper behavior. Treble damages is a statutory
remedy most often awarded in antitrust violations.
EXEMPLARY [PUNITIVE] DAMAGES compensation in excess of actual
damages that is a form of punishment to the wrongdoer and reparation
to the injured. Exemplary damages are awarded only in rare instances of
malicious and willful misconduct.
EXAMPLE: Several corporations are found guilty of fixing the price of
milk over a nine-year period. In addition to assessing a fine on the
corporations, a judge awards an additional amount as punitive damages.
Since all purchases of milk were affected by the price-fixing, the judge
might order that the amount of the punitive damages be repaid to
consumers by a coupon offering.
EXPECTATION DAMAGES a measure of the money damages available to
plaintiff in an action for breach of contract, based on the value of the
benefit he would have received from the contract if the defendant had
not breached, but had completed performance as agreed. The amount is
generally the monetary value of full performance of the contract to the
plaintiff minus costs plaintiff avoided by not performing his own part of
the contract.
GENERAL DAMAGES see ACTUAL DAMAGES above.
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES losses reasonably incident to conduct giving rise
to a claim for actual damages. A buyer’s incidental damages would
include expenses reasonably incurred in inspection, receipt,
transportation, and care and custody of goods rightfully rejected while
the seller’s incidental damages would include any commercially
reasonable charges, expenses or commissions incurred in stopping
delivery, in the transportation, care and custody of goods after the
buyer’s breach, in connection with return or resale of the goods.
LIQUIDATED DAMAGES see liquidated damages.
NOMINAL DAMAGES a trivial sum awarded as recognition that a legal
injury was sustained, though slight. Nominal damages will be awarded
for a breach of contract or for an intentional tort to vindicate the
plaintiffs claim where no recoverable loss can be established.
PUNITIVE DAMAGES see EXEMPLARY [PUNITIVE] DAMAGES above.
SPECIAL DAMAGES see CONSEQUENTIAL [SPECIAL] DAMAGES above.
TREBLE DAMAGES see DOUBLE [TREBLE] DAMAGES above.
DAMNUM ABSQUE INJURIA (däm’nu@m äb’-skwa@ ĭn-ju@’-re@-ä) Lat.:
harm without injury. Refers to damage without violation of law, or to
damage caused by nature, where the law provides no cause of action to
recover for the loss. Compare compensation.
DANGEROUS WEAPON [INSTRUMENTALITY] almost any device
that has the potential to cause serious bodily injury or endanger life.
DATA CAPTURE see automatic [electronic] data capture.
DATA PROTECTION requirements for ensuring the effectiveness of
information security controls over information resources that support
business or governmental operations. Also, prevention of the
dissemination of personal information without consent of the individual.
DATE RAPE see rape [DATE RAPE].
DAY IN COURT refers broadly to the opportunity afforded a party to a
lawsuit to be heard by the court. See appearance; due process of law.
DAY ORDER see order [DAY ORDER].
DBA [D/B/A] abbreviation for “doing business as.” Trade name.
EXAMPLE: William and Lorna Scott are doing business under the name of
Scott’s Hockey Supplies and a lawsuit is brought. Its caption might read
Britton Michael v. William and Lorna Scott DBA Scott’s Hockey
Supplies.
DB(k) a hybrid retirement plan that would combine the features of a
defined benefit plan with a defined contribution (401(k)) plan. The
DB(k) features an employer-funded monthly retirement payment that
can be augmented with tax-deferred employee contributions. The
Pension Protection Act will provide businesses with less than 500
employees the opportunity to offer this plan starting in 2010.
DBN see letters of administration [DBN].
DEADBEAT DAD [MOM] a person who fails to pay court-ordered child
support and may, as a result, be subjected to any of the following
penalties: garnishment of wages; refusal to allow the parent to obtain a
legal passport; interception of unemployment compensation and/or
offsetting federal and/or state income tax refunds, or even incarceration
for contempt of court.
DEAD HAND see mortmain.
DEADLY FORCE see force [DEADLY FORCE].
DEADLY WEAPON any device capable of causing death or serious bodily
injury. An instrument may be intrinsically deadly, as a knife or pistol, or
deadly because of the way it is used, as a wrench or hammer.
DEALER one who produces or acquires something in order to sell it. One
is a dealer if he or she has structured his or her business so that he or she
can, upon reasonable notice, deliver his or her commodity once a sale
has been made.
DEATH the point at which life ceases; permanent and irreversible
termination of vital signs. Several states have adopted statutes defining
death to include brain criteria. See brain death.
DEATH BY AUTOMOBILE see homicide; manslaughter [DEATH BY
AUTOMOBILE].
DEATH PENALTY the ultimate punishment imposed for murder or other
capital offenses. The U.S. Supreme Court has determined that the death
penalty is not in every instance to be considered unconstitutional, as
cruel and unusual punishment.
DEATH TAX see tax [ESTATE TAX; INHERITANCE TAX].
DEBAUCHERY overindulgences in sensual pleasures; sexual immorality;
as used in the Mann Act [prohibiting travel across state lines for
immoral purposes]. It is a broad term and includes all sexual
immoralities, whether for hire or not for hire, or for cohabitation.
DE BENE ESSE (de*be*’-ne*e*s’-se*) Lat.: conditionally; provisionally.
APPEARANCE DE BENE ESSE a conditional appearance, by which one
appearing in the jurisdiction intends not to thereby subject himself or
herself to the authority of the court for all purposes.
DEPOSITIONS DE BENE ESSE conditional depositions that cannot be
introduced in evidence if the witness is available at the trial.
EVIDENCE DE BENE ESSE evidence whose admissibility is conditioned
upon a subsequent showing of facts necessary to support its admission.
DEBENTURE written acknowledgment of a debt secured only by the
general credit or promise to pay of the issuer. Debentures are the
common type of bond issued by large, well-established corporations
with adequate credit ratings. The written agreement under which the
debentures are sold, the indenture, is specific as to maturity date,
interest rate, call features and convertibility. Holders of debentures
representing corporate indebtedness are creditors of the corporation and
entitled to payment before shareholders upon dissolution of the
corporation.
DEBIT a sum charged as due or owing. In bookkeeping, a term used to
denote an entry on the left, or asset side of a ledger or account
indicating the creation of or addition to an asset or an expense, or the
reduction or elimination of a liability. Also, the balance of an account
where it is shown that something remains due to the person keeping the
account. Compare credit.
DE BONIS NON see letters of administration [DE BONIS NON].
DEBT any obligation of one person to pay or compensate another. See bad
debt; bankruptcy; bond [BONDED DEBT]; creditor; floating debt;
insolvency. See also satisfaction (of a debt).
DEBT CAPITAL see security [DEBT CAPITAL].
DEBTOR one who owes another anything, or is under obligation, arising
from express agreement, implication of law, or principles of natural
justice, to pay money or to fulfill some other obligation; in bankruptcy
or similar proceedings, the person who is the subject of the proceeding.
DECEASED one who has died. In property law, the alternate term
DECEDENT is generally used. In criminal law, “the deceased” refers to
the victim of a homicide.
DECEDENT see deceased.
DECEIT the tort or fraudulent representation of a material fact made
with knowledge of its falsity, or recklessly, or without reasonable
grounds for believing its truth and with intent to induce reliance on it;
the plaintiff justifiably relies on the deception, to his injury.
DECISION act of determining; forming a definite opinion; or coming to a
conclusion. A resort to a choice of possibilities is “guesswork,” not a
“decision.” A final determination arrived at after consideration, an
opinion formed, or a course of action decided upon. A decision
necessarily involves a dispute, actual or potential. See judgment;
opinion.
DECISION ON THE MERITS see judgment [JUDGMENT ON THE
MERITS].
DECLARANT person making a statement. See deponent; witness. See
also declaration.
DECLARATION in common law, the formal document specifying
plaintiff’s cause of action, including the facts necessary to sustain a
proper cause of action and to advise defendant of the grounds upon
which he or she is being sued. See complaint.
DECLARATION AGAINST INTEREST a statement that at the time of
its making was so contrary to the declarant’s pecuniary, proprietary, or
penal interest that a reasonable person would not have made the
statement unless he or she believed it to be true. Further, the declarant
must have personal knowledge and, in some jurisdictions, must be
unavailable at the time of trial. Because of its special trustworthiness, a
declaration against interest is an exception to the hearsay rule.
EXAMPLE: A statement by a juvenile that he had thrown a bicycle frame
out an eighth floor stairwell window of the defendant’s building is
admissible hearsay in an action against the defendant housing authority
for failure to repair the stairwell window.
ADMISSIONS BY A PARTY-OPPONENT distinguishable from declarations
against interest in that admissions of a party-opponent are per se
admissible and thus do not have to satisfy the above requirements for a
declaration against interest and they do not have to, although they may,
be against interest when made. Further, the party making the admission
need not be unavailable and need not have personal knowledge.
EXAMPLE: A statement by a defendant, questioned in Nebraska about a
homicide committed in New Jersey, that he had never been to New
Jersey is admissible as an admission by a party (along with proof of his
ten-year residency in New Jersey) to show that the defendant lied to
throw off the investigation.
DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX see return [DECLARATION OF
ESTIMATED TAX].
DECLARATION OF TRUST see trust [DECLARATION OF TRUST].
DECLARATORY JUDGMENT a judgment of the court to establish the
rights of the parties or express the opinion of the court on a question of
law, without ordering anything to be done or granting any remedy.
EXAMPLE: A state legislature passes a taxing measure that will have a
widespread effect on corporations doing interstate business within that
state. A payment of the tax with a subsequent refund if the tax is found
invalid would result in administrative difficulties. Therefore, one of the
affected corporations asks a court for a declaratory judgment on the
validity of the tax.
Compare advisory opinion; injunction. See controversy;
justiciability.
DECLARATORY STATUTE a statute that merely declares the existing
law without proposing changes, for the purpose of resolving conflicts
concerning the meaning of a previous statute or portion of the common
law.
DECREE 1. the judicial decision in a litigated cause rendered by a court
of equity; 2. the determination of a cause in courts of admiralty and
probate. It is accurate to use the word judgment for a decision of a
court of law, and decree from a court of equity, although the former
term now includes both.
CONSENT DECREE an agreement of the parties made under sanction of
the court, not the result of a judicial determination, but merely
agreement to be bound by certain stipulated facts.
DECREE NISI in English law, a provisional decree of divorce, which
becomes absolute only after a specified interval, usually six months,
during which parties have the opportunity to show cause why the decree
should not become absolute.
FINAL DECREE one that ultimately disposes of every matter of contention
between the parties and constitutes a bar to another action on the same
subject matter between the same parties.
INTERLOCUTORY DECREE one made upon some point arising during the
progress of the suit that does not determine finally the merits of the
entire suit.
DECREE NISI see decree [DECREE NISI]; nisi [DECREE NISI].
DECRIMINALIZATION the adoption or repeal of legislation, the effect
of which is that acts or omissions formerly considered criminal are no
longer so characterized, and penal sanctions for such acts or omissions
are removed.
DEDICATION a conveyance of land as a grant to the public by a private
owner and an acceptance of that land on behalf of the public.
EXAMPLE: Pollard Company buys a large area of land, on which it plans
to locate its national headquarters. To promote goodwill between the
company and the surrounding communities, the company dedicates a
portion of land to the county parks committee that accepts permanent
ownership of the land.
DEDUCTIONS amounts allowed to taxpayers under the Internal Revenue
Code as offsets against GROSS INCOME or ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME (see
income).
ITEMIZED DEDUCTIONS specific individualized deductions, allowed
under provisions of the Code for specific expenses incurred by the
taxpayer during the taxable year. These deductions are allowed in
computing TAXABLE INCOME (see income) to the extent they exceed the
ZERO BRACKET AMOUNT.
MARITAL DEDUCTION a deductible amount under the unified estate and
gift tax for certain interests in property transferred to a spouse.
PERSONAL EXPENSES DEDUCTION personal expenses as opposed to
expenses for income-producing or business expenses. Personal expenses
are not allowed as deductions except as specifically enumerated in the
Internal Revenue Code.
STANDARD DEDUCTION a provision allowing a taxpayer to deduct, in lieu
of itemized deductions, a percentage of gross income up to certain
specified amounts, repealed and replaced by the ZERO BRACKET
AMOUNT.
ZERO BRACKET AMOUNT DEDUCTION an amount of income below the
amounts at which, according to the tax tables, income taxes must be
paid.
DEED an instrument in writing that conveys an interest in land (realty)
from the grantor to the grantee. Its main function is to pass title to land.
See bargain and sale; quitclaim deed; warranty.
DEED OF TRUST a transfer of legal title to property from owner to a
trustee, so that the trustee may hold the title as security for the
performance of certain obligations, monetary or otherwise, by the
owner of a third party. Compare mortgage.
DEED POLL a deed made by and obligatory upon one party alone.
DEEP ROCK DOCTRINE a doctrine that makes available a remedy for
improper conduct in connection with a loan to a corporation by a
controlling shareholder. Though generally loans to a corporation by a
shareholder are entitled to equal priority with loans made by outside
creditors, the doctrine allows, when there are bankruptcy proceedings
involving the corporation, subordination of the shareholder loans to the
claims of other creditors where it would be manifestly unfair to permit a
controlling shareholder to participate equally with these other creditors.
The unfairness occurs most commonly where the corporation is
undercapitalized and frequently involves a parent corporation as the
controlling shareholder of a subsidiary.
DE FACTO (de* fäk’-to@) Lat.: in fact. By virtue of the deed or
accomplishment; actually. Used to refer to a situation in which a
condition or institution is operating as though it were official or
pursuant to law, but that is not legally authorized. Such situations may
arise where, for example, an authorizing law is declared invalid, or
because required legal formalities have not been satisfied.
EXAMPLE: Nursing homes were established throughout a particular state
under the authority of a newly enacted state law. Now, two years later,
portions of the law are found to be unconstitutional. Instead of closing
all the homes that were set up, the state permits them to continue to
operate under its de facto authority until the law is amended and legal.
The de facto acts of a person or entity may for some purposes be
regarded as legally binding. Compare de jure.
DE FACTO AUTHORITY authority exercised in fact.
DE FACTO BOARD OF DIRECTORS the board which in fact is in charge of
the affairs of a company and is recognized as such and is performing the
legitimate functions and duties of a board.
DE FACTO CORPORATION one which has inadvertently failed to comply
with the provisions of the laws relating to the creation of a corporation
but has made a good faith effort to do so and has in good faith
exercised the franchise of a corporation. See also corporation [DE
FACTO CORPORATION].
DE FACTO COURT one established and exercising judicial functions under
the authority of an apparently valid statute. If the statute is subsequently
declared invalid, the court exists in fact though not in law. See de jure.
DE FACTO INCUMBENT one who was elected in an election which is later
declared void.
DE FACTO JUDGE one acting under color of right, and who exercises the
judicial functions he assumed while the appointment is contested.
DE FACTO JURY a jury selected in pursuance of a void law.
DE FACTO OFFICER one whose title is not good in law, but who in fact
possesses an office and discharges his duties.
DE FACTO SEGREGATION segregation which results without purposeful
action by government officials; real or actual segregation which results
from social, psychological, or economic conditions.
DE FACTO TRUSTEE one who assumes an office or position under color
of right or title and who exercises the duties of the office.
DEFALCATION failure of one entrusted with money to pay over the
money when it is due to another. The term is like misappropriation and
embezzlement, but is wider in scope because it does not imply criminal
fraud.
DEFAMATION the publication of anything injurious to the reputation of
another. Defamation designed to be read is libel; oral defamation is
slander.
EXAMPLE: A reporter publishes an article that Ryan is being investigated
for misapplication of public funds. The article has no basis in fact, but,
as a result of it, Ryan is forced to temporarily leave his position as
director. Ryan has been libeled and probably has a defamation action
against the reporter.
DEFAULT failure to discharge a duty. The term is often used in the context
of mortgages to describe failure of the mortgagor to pay installments
when due, and in the context of judicial proceedings to describe failure
of one of the parties to take procedural steps to prevent entry of a
judgment against him (called a default judgment). See delict.
DEFAULT JUDGMENT 1. a judgment against defendant who has failed
to respond to plaintiff’s action or to appear at the trial or hearing.
EXAMPLE: A carpenter files a suit against a homeowner, claiming that the
homeowner failed to pay the carpenter for work performed six months
ago. Under the state’s court rules, the homeowner has twenty days to
file an answer to the carpenter’s claim. If the homeowner fails to do so
within twenty days, the court will enter a default judgment against him
declaring that the homeowner must pay the carpenter what is claimed.
2. judgment given without the defendant being heard in his own
defense. Compare confession of judgment; ex parte.
DEFEASANCE an instrument that negates the effectiveness of a deed or
of a will; a collateral deed that defeats the force of another deed upon
the performance of certain conditions.
DEFEASIBLE subject to revocation if certain conditions are not met;
capable of being avoided or annulled, or liable to such avoidance or
annulment.
DEFEASIBLE FEE see determinable fee.
DEFECT see inherent defect; latent defect; patent defect.
DEFECTIVE 1. incomplete, faulty; 2. not reasonably safe for a use that
can be reasonably anticipated. See products liability; strict liability;
warranty.
DEFECTIVE PLEADING any pleading [complaint, answer, cross-claim,
etc.] which fails to conform in form or substance to minimum standards
of accuracy or sufficiency. Under strict common law pleading rules, a
defective pleading was often fatal to the lawsuit. Under modern relaxed
standards, such occurrences are rare and are curable by amendment.
DEFECTIVE TITLE unmarketable right of ownership. 1. With reference
to land, it means that the title held by the person making the
conveyance, claiming to own good title, is or might be subject to
partial or complete ownership by someone else.
EXAMPLE: Allie wants to sell her house to a friend who is moving into the
state. Prior to purchasing the house, the friend has a title search done to
determine if anyone else has claimed ownership of the house besides
Allie. That search discloses a bank note that has never been paid but
that the bank has never acted upon. Still, the outstanding bank note
gives rise to a defective title, which now makes the friend reluctant to
buy the house.
2. As to negotiable instruments, the term denotes title obtained
through fraud or other illegal means.
DEFENDANT 1. in civil proceedings, the party responding to the
complaint; one who is sued and called upon to make satisfaction for a
wrong complained of by another; 2. in criminal proceedings, the
accused. See also respondent.
CO-DEFENDANT see co-defendant.
DEFENDANT IN ERROR the prevailing party in the lower court who is the
adverse party in the appellate proceeding where review has been sought
on a writ of error. The person who brings the action at the appellate
level is called the PLAINTIFF IN ERROR. See appellee.
DEFENSE a denial, answer or plea disputing the validity of plaintiff’s
case, or making some further contention that renders the defendant not
liable upon the facts alleged by the plaintiff.
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE one that serves as a basis for proving some new
fact, whereby defendant does not simply deny a charge but offers new
evidence to avoid judgment against him or her.
EQUITABLE DEFENSE a defense that is recognized by courts of equity
acting solely upon rules of equity. Such defenses can now be asserted in
courts of law as well.
DEFENSE ATTORNEY lawyer representing a defendant. Includes both
civil and criminal defense. A criminal defendant who cannot afford
counsel is entitled to one appointed at the state’s expense. See public
defender.
DEFENSE OF MARRIAGE ACT [DOMA] 1996 federal law allowing a
state to refuse to recognize a same-sex marriage granted under the laws
of another state. As of press time, the act is undergoing multiple
challenges. Portions of the act have been ruled unconstitutional and, as a
result, same-sex married couples qualify as “spouses” for purposes of
federal laws. Social security survivor benefits, bankruptcy action status,
immigration issues, and insurance for federal employees are some of the
areas affecting spousal recognition.
DEFERMENT postponing or putting off to a future time. May apply to the
vesting or enjoyment of an estate, or to the calling of a person to serve
in the armed forces. To defer does not mean to abolish or omit.
DEFERRED COMPENSATION see retirement plans [DEFERRED
COMPENSATION].
DEFERRED PAYMENTS payments extended over a period of time or put
off to a future date.
DEFICIENCY the excess of a taxpayer’s correct tax liability for the
taxable year over the amount of taxes previously paid for such year.
The Internal Revenue Service is authorized to assess deficiencies
during an audit of the taxpayer’s return, and a deficiency may be used
to assess penalties for the underpayment of tax, such as for negligence
or fraud in filing the return.
DEFICIT insufficiency in an account or number, whether as the result of
defaults and misappropriations or of mistake or shrinkage in value.
DEFINITE FAILURE OF ISSUE see failure of issue.
DEFLORATION the act of taking a person’s virginity.
DEFRAUD to deprive a person of property or interest, estate or right by
fraud or deceit.
DEGREE a measure. Also, the certificate of achievement that a school,
college, or university gives to a student who completes a specified
course of study or curriculum.
DEGREE OF CONSANGUINITY [KINSHIP] see consanguinity.
DEGREE OF CRIME the measure of the seriousness of a criminal act that
determines the range of criminal sanctions that may be imposed for the
crime. For instance, under the Model Penal Code, assault can be
classified into any of four degrees depending upon the victim or the
manner of commission. A simple assault could be a petty misdemeanor
carrying a sentence of not more than 30 days, or a misdemeanor
carrying a sentence of not more than one year; an aggravated assault
could be a crime of the third degree exposing the defendant to five
years, or a crime of the second degree carrying a maximum sentence of
ten years.
DEGREE OF NEGLIGENCE the measure of negligence necessary for
liability to result. Parties under an obligation to exercise great care,
such as common carriers, may be liable for slight negligence, whereas
parties only required to exercise slight care, such as the driver of an
automobile in a state that has a guest statute, will be liable to a
passenger only for gross negligence.
DEGREE OF PROOF the measure of probability necessary in order for a
court or other fact finder to render a decision or a verdict with regard
to the evidence presented to it. See preponderance of the evidence;
clear and convincing; reasonable doubt.
DE JURE (de*ju’-ra@) Lat.: by right; lawful; legitimate.
EXAMPLE: a new corporation is set up exactly according to both state and
federal incorporation laws. The corporation is therefore a de jure (i.e.,
legal) corporation.
Generally used in contrast to de facto; de jure connotes “as a matter
of law,” whereas de facto connotes “as a matter of practice not founded
upon law.”
DEL CREDERE an agent, employed to make transactions, who
guarantees (to the principal) the solvency of the purchaser and the
performance of the contract in exchange for a higher commission.
DELEGABLE DUTY a duty that an obligor is able to transfer to another.
The term does not imply a giving up of authority but, rather, the
conferring of authority to another to do things that otherwise must be
done by the obligor. When delegation occurs, it does not free the obligor
from his or her duty to see to it that performance is properly complied
with. Only by novation may the original obligor totally discharge his or
her responsibilities and liabilities.
Where performance by the delegate would vary materially from the
performance of the obligor, the duty is NONDELEGABLE. Thus, under a
contract to paint a portrait or where a contract is premised on the unique
abilities of the obligor, the duties are nondelegable. Construction
contracts, however, are generally held to be delegable because it is
contemplated by the parties that the work will be performed by persons
other than the obligor.
DELEGATE l. to appoint, authorize or commission; the transfer of
authority by one person to another; 2. a person commissioned to act
instead of another.
DELEGATED POWER power conferred by one person on another who will
act for his or her benefit.
DELIBERATE to consider all of the evidence and arguments presented in
regard to a particular matter. For instance, after the evidence has been
presented, the parties to a lawsuit have made their closing arguments,
and the judge has given the jury its instructions, the jury will retire to
deliberate and render its verdict.
DELIBERATE SPEED forthwith, immediate. In certain instances, such as
the desegregation of public facilities, the term implies that
desegregation should occur as quickly as the maintenance of law and
order and the welfare of all citizens will allow.
DELIBERATION the process by which the reasons for and against a
verdict are weighed by jurors. While such verdict should be the
consensus of the judgments of each juror, the purpose of deliberation is
to allow opinions to be changed by conference in the jury room.
DELICT a tort; a wrong or injury; any statutory violation; sometimes used
in the sense of a default on a monetary obligation.
DELICTUM Latin for tort. An action EX DELICTO is an action in tort as
distinguished from one EX CONTRACTU, in contract.
DELICTUM Latin for tort. An ACTION EX DELICTO is an action in tort as
opposed to one EX CONTRACTU, in contract. This distinction was
significant when the early forms of code pleading were very strict. If,
for example, one alleged a cause of action ex delicto for fraud but the
proof established a breach of warranty (an action ex contractu) the case
would be dismissed for variance.
DELINQUENT in a monetary context, payable but overdue and unpaid.
See default. See also juvenile delinquent.
DELISTING removal of an issue from trading on an organized exchange
such as the New York Stock Exchange. Organized exchanges have
minimum listing requirements that must be met before listed trading is
allowed. If the issuer fails to maintain the minimum requirements,
trading in its listed securities can be suspended or eliminated.
DELIVERY a voluntary transfer of title or possession from one party to
another; a legally recognized handing over to another one’s possessory
rights. Where actual delivery is cumbersome or impossible, the courts
may find constructive delivery sufficient if the intention is clearly to
transfer title. Thus, one may deliver the contents of a safety deposit box
by handing over the key together with any necessary authorization.
Such action is also called SYMBOLIC DELIVERY. Compare bailment.
DELUSION a false belief that is produced by a mental disorder and that
people of the same age, class, and education would find incredible. A
delusion can be the basis for the insanity defense to a crime.
DEMAND see on demand.
DEMAND NOTE 1. an instrument that by its express terms is payable
immediately on an agreed-upon date of maturity without further
demand for payment; 2. an instrument payable at sight, or upon
presentation, or one in which no time for payment is stated.
DEMESNE (de-me@n’) Fr: domain. Something owned; held in one’s own
right, and not of a superior; not allotted to tenants. In the language of
pleading, own, proper, or original. See ancient demesne.
DE MINIMIS (de*mĭ’-nĭ-mĭs) Lat.: trifling. Of insufficient significance to
warrant judicial attention.
DE MINIMIS NON CURAT LEX (no*n ku@’-rät le*x) Lat.: the law does not care
for small things; the law does not bother with trifles.
EXAMPLE: Cy is arrested for possession of one marijuana cigarette.
Although marijuana possession has not been decriminalized in the state
where Cy is arrested, the prosecutor decides not to prosecute Cy for the
possession since it is only a de minimis infraction.
DEMISE term used to describe a conveyance of an estate in real
property; to let, especially pursuant to a lease for a term of years.
DEMONSTRATIVE EVIDENCE evidence consisting of an object or
thing, such as a weapon used in a crime, a stolen item, or a photograph
or X-ray, that may aid the jury in understanding the crime before it but
has no effect on the question of guilt; evidence other than a person’s
oral testimony but that may help to explain that testimony.
DEMUR to present a demurrer. More broadly, to take an exception to a
point of law or an allegation of facts on the basis that even if it is so it
does not advance the interests of the party making the statement.
DEMURRER formal allegation that facts as stated in the pleadings, even
if true, are not legally sufficient for the case to proceed further. It does
not admit anything but tests whether the complaint is sufficient to state
a cause of action. In modern procedure, a motion to dismiss for
failure to state a claim upon which relief may be granted replaces the
demurrer. Compare summary judgment.
DENIAL a contradiction or traverse; in practice, a refutation of
affirmative allegations contained in the pleading of an adversary. A
defendant’s answer must admit, deny, or state there is insufficient
information upon which to admit or deny the plaintiff’s allegations. Any
allegation in a complaint to which a responsive pleading is required,
other than for amount of damages, is admitted when not denied in the
responsive pleading. Averments in a pleading to which no responsive
pleading is required or permitted shall be taken as denied or avoided.
See confession and avoidance; negative pregnant.
CONJUNCTIVE DENIAL a denial that denies all of the allegations as
wholly untrue.
DISJUNCTIVE DENIAL a denial that denies the allegations as untrue in the
alternative.
GENERAL DENIAL a denial of all of the plaintiff’s allegations.
SPECIFIC DENIAL a denial of one or several, but not all, of the plaintiff’s
allegations.
DE NOVO (de*no@’-vo@) Lat.: anew. A second time, as though the first had
never taken place. See plenary.
DE NOVO HEARING a new hearing, in which the judgment of the first
hearing is suspended and the case proceeds as if it had originated in the
reviewing tribunal.
EXAMPLE: A state statute gives a defendant convicted in a municipal
court the right to appeal that conviction de novo in a higher court. That
right means that the defendant will have a new trial in which the facts
and issues will be reviewed anew.
DEODAND see forfeiture.
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY [DHS] leverages
resources within federal, state, and local governments, coordinating the
transition of multiple agencies and programs into a single, integrated
agency focused on protecting the American people and their homeland.
It has four essential missions: (1) information analysis and infrastructure
protection (reviews intelligence and law enforcement information from
all agencies of government and produces a single daily picture of threats
against the homeland); (2) chemical, biological, radiological, and
nuclear countermeasures (brings together the country’s best scientists to
develop technologies that detect biological, chemical, and nuclear
weapons to best protect citizens); (3) emergency preparedness and
response (works with state and local authorities to respond quickly and
effectively to emergencies); and (4) border and transportation security
(controls the borders and prevents terrorists and explosives from
entering the country). Some of the specific agencies falling under the
DHS include: the TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION [TSA]
(protects the nation’s transportation systems to ensure freedom of
movement for people and commerce); the United States Customs and
Border Protection [CBP] (responsible for protecting our nation’s
borders in order to prevent terrorists and terrorist weapons from
entering the United States, while facilitating the flow of legitimate trade
and travel); United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
[USCIS] (responsible for the administration of immigration and
naturalization adjudication functions and establishing immigration
services policies and priorities); United States Immigration and
Customs Enforcement [ICE] (responsible for identifying and shutting
down vulnerabilities in the nation’s border, economic, transportation,
and infrastructure security); the UNITED STATES COAST GUARD (protects
the public, the environment, and U.S. economic interests in the nation’s
ports, waterways, coastline, and on international waters as required to
support national security); the FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
AGENCY [FEMA] (prepares the nation for hazards, manages federal
response and recovery efforts following any national incident, and
administers the National Flood Insurance Program); the UNITED STATES
SECRET SERVICE (protects the President and other high-level officials
and investigates counterfeiting and other financial crimes, including
financial institution fraud, identity theft, computer fraud, and computerbased attacks on our nation’s financial, banking, and
telecommunications infrastructure); and the Office of Health Affairs
(coordinates all medical activities to ensure appropriate preparation for
and response to incidents having medical significance). See
www.dhs.gov.
DEPENDENCY a territory or possession not within the boundaries of the
country that has jurisdiction to govern it. Dependencies of the United
States include Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and various other
islands located in the Pacific Ocean.
DEPENDENT any person with respect to whom a taxpayer can claim a
dependency exemption; defined by the Internal Revenue Code as any
individual supported by the taxpayer who is related to the taxpayer in
specified ways or who makes his principal abode in the taxpayer’s
household.
DEPENDENT CARE see child and dependent care credit.
DEPENDENT COVENANTS see covenant [DEPENDENT COVE-NANTS].
DEPENDENT RELATIVE REVOCATION the doctrine that provides
that when a will revokes an earlier will executed by the same person,
the earlier will is only revoked if the latter will is effective; otherwise,
the earlier will remains in full effect and force.
DEPLETION the exhaustion of a natural resource, the amount of the
original deposit being hidden and thus necessarily unknown. Depletion
is most often referred to in federal income tax deduction provisions
that deal with exhaustion of natural resources.
The DEPLETION ALLOWANCE is a formula for computing and
excluding from the proceeds of natural resource operations that part of
the operations’ proceeds that is in effect a return of capital.
EXAMPLE: Petro Corporation purchases several leases of land on which it
plans to drill oil. If oil is extracted from any of those leased lands, the
value of the lease is reduced. The depletion allowance determines a
figure based on that reduction in value. Petro then uses that figure to
reduce its tax obligation.
Depletion allowance should be contrasted with depreciation
deduction provisions that deal with deterioration of tangible physical
property incident to its use that shortens its period of service.
DEPONENT a witness; especially one who gives information under oath,
in a deposition concerning facts known to him or her.
DEPORTATION the transfer of an alien to a foreign country because the
deporting government refuses to harbor a person whose presence is
deemed inconsistent with the public welfare. Compare extradition.
DEPOSE 1. to give evidence or testimony, especially in response to
interrogation during a deposition; 2. the act of interrogating and
eliciting testimony during a deposition, typically conducted by a lawyer.
DEPOSIT [EARNEST] MONEY see earnest.
DEPOSITION a method of pretrial discovery that consists of a
stenographically transcribed statement of a witness under oath, in
response to an attorney’s questions, with opportunity for the opposing
party or his or her attorney to be present and to cross-examine. Such a
statement is the most common form of discovery and may be taken of
any witness (whether or not a party to the action). When taken in the
form described, it is called an oral deposition. Depositions may also be
taken upon written interrogatories, where the questions are read to the
witness by the officer who is taking the deposition.
DEPOSITION DE BENE ESSE see de bene esse.
DEPRECIATION a deduction allowed to a taxpayer representing a
reasonable allowance for the exhaustion of property used in a trade or
business, or property held for the production of income. The purpose of
charging depreciation against equipment is to generate a tax-free stream
of income equal to the portion of the asset that has been “used up” and
to distinguish the portion of income that is a return of capital. Compare
depletion.
ACCELERATED DEPRECIATION any one of a number of allowed methods
of calculating depreciation that permit greater amounts of deductions in
earlier years than are permitted under the straight line method, which
assumes equal depreciation during each year of the asset’s useful life.
SALVAGE VALUE the estimated value of the property when the taxpayer
completes his or her use of the property. In determining the amount of
depreciation allowable, salvage value must be subtracted from basis.
STRAIGHT LINE DEPRECIATION a method that calculates the depreciation
deduction available by subtracting the asset’s SALVAGE VALUE from its
total value and dividing the difference by the number of years of the
asset’s useful life.
USEFUL LIFE the reasonable estimate of the term of an asset’s usefulness
to the taxpayer in his or her business.
DEPRECIATION RESERVE the total depreciation charged against all
productive assets as stated on the balance sheet. The charge is made to
allow realistic reduction in the value of productive assets and to allow
tax-free recovery of the original investment in assets. See accumulated
depreciation.
DEPREDATION see piracy.
DEPRESSANTS see controlled substances.
DERELICTION a recession of waters of the sea, a navigable river or other
stream, by which land that had been covered with water is left dry. If the
alteration is sudden and noticeable, ownership remains according to
former bounds; but if recession is gradual and imperceptible, the
derelict or dry land belongs to the riparian owner from whose shore the
water has so receded. The term may also refer to the land that is thus
left uncovered. For contiguous landowners to gain ownership of the
newly uncovered land, the withdrawal of the water must appear
permanent, not merely seasonal. Compare accretion; avulsion.
DERIVATIVE ACTION 1. an action based upon a primary right of a
corporation, but asserted on its behalf by the shareholder because of
the corporation’s failure, deliberate or otherwise, to assert the right; 2. a
cause of action founded upon an injury to another, as when a husband
sues for loss of consortium or services of his wife on account of injury
to her by the defendant, or when a father sues for loss of services of
children. See stockholders’ derivative action.
DERIVATIVE TORT an action in tort based on the criminal conduct of
defendant that resulted in injury to plaintiff for which he seeks
compensation. The action is distinct from any criminal prosecution that
may result from the same conduct by defendant.
DEROGATION partial taking away of the effectiveness of a law; partially
repealing or abolishing a law.
DESCENT a method of acquiring property, usually real property,
through the laws of descent and distribution from a decedent without
the use of a will; generally applied to inheritance only by intestate
succession. Compare devise. See worthier title, doctrine of.
DESCENT AND DISTRIBUTION the transmission of an intestate’s
property to his heirs.
DESEGREGATION see segregation.
DESERTION act of abandonment of a relation or service in which one
owes duties. In matrimonial law, an unjustified cessation from
cohabitation, with intent not to resume it and without the consent of the
other spouse, is desertion and is grounds for divorce. In military law,
ABSENT WITHOUT LEAVE [AWOL] signifies an intention by a member of
the armed forces not to return to service. It is punishable under the Code
of Military Justice.
DESIGNEE one who is designated or delegated, usually to perform a
specific role or duty.
DESIST see cease and desist order.
DESTINATION CONTRACT see tender [TENDER OF DELIVERY].
DESTRUCTIBILITY refers to a common-law rule that when a
contingent remainder does not vest at or before the termination of the
preceding freehold estate, the remainder interest is destroyed. Thus, the
termination of the preceding estate, because of its inherent limitation, or
as a result of forfeiture or merger, destroys the nonvested contingent
remainder.
DESTRUCTIVE DEVICE a firearm or explosive or incendiary device.
Includes poison gas, bombs, grenades, rockets, missiles, mines, or
similar devices.
DESUETUDE a term applied to obsolete laws and practices that may
therefore be regarded as no longer in effect.
DETAINER 1. keeping a person from goods or land to which he or she has
a legal right; 2. a writ or instrument, issued by a competent officer,
authorizing a prison warden to keep in his or her custody a person
therein named. See also detention.
FORCIBLE DETAINER see forcible detainer; forcible entry [FORCIBLE
ENTRY AND DETAINER].
UNLAWFUL DETAINER refusal to deliver on demand, as where the tenant,
after termination of the lease, refuses to deliver possession to the
landlord. Compare tenancy [TENANCY AT SUFFERANCE]; trespass.
DETENTION holding of a person charged with crime following the
person’s arrest on that charge; restraining a person for some official
purpose, by establishing control over the person. See also preventive
detention.
DETENTION CENTER see jail [DETENTION CENTER].
INVESTIGATIVE DETENTION refers to the holding of a suspect without
formal arrest during the investigation of his possible participation in a
crime. Such investigative detention is unconstitutional if probable
cause does not exist to charge him with the crime.
DETERMINABLE FEE [FEE SIMPLE DETERMINABLE] an interest
in property that may last forever, but that will automatically terminate
upon the happening or nonhappening of a specified event. Also called a
DEFEASIBLE FEE or a FEE SIMPLE DEFEASIBLE.
EXAMPLE: A brother conveys a large office building to his sister provided
she remains unmarried. If she is unmarried at her death, she can dispose
of it as she pleases in her will. But once she marries, the ownership of
the building reverts to the brother. The sister’s interest in the building
after the brother’s conveyance is a determinable fee.
DETERMINATION a decision by a court or other adjudicative body. See
holding; judgment; verdict.
DETINUE in common law, an action for the wrongful detention of
personal property; a legal claim provided for the recovery of a specific
thing, and for obtaining damages for its detention. Compare detainer
[UNLAWFUL DETAINER].
DEVISE a gift of real property made by will. In modern usage, the term
may also embrace testamentary gifts of personal property. Compare
bequest; legacy.
DEVOLVE to pass property from one person to another by operation of
law, without any voluntary act of the previous owner.
DICTA plural form of dictum.
DICTUM a statement in a judicial opinion not necessary for the decision
of the case. Dictum differs from the holding in that it does not establish
a rule binding on the courts in subsequent cases.
EXAMPLE: Sandor claims that the issue of his liability for damage on his
sidewalk resulting in injury to another was settled in a previous case.
The judge reminds Sandor that the previous case concerned the city’s
obligation to keep the sidewalks in good repair and the city’s liability
for injury to a person. The part of the case addressed to a private
citizen’s liability was not necessary to the decision and hence was only
dictum and is not binding on this judge.
CONSIDERED DICTUM refers to a discussion of a point of law that,
although it is dictum, is nevertheless so well developed that it is later
incorporated into an opinion of a court as though it were authority.
DIE WITHOUT ISSUE see failure of issue.
DIGITAL CERTIFICATE encoded data of identifying information
certifying that the sender or receiver is who it claims to be, by way of
third-party verification. A method of tracking visitors to a web site. A
BLIND CERTIFICATE verifies limited information without revealing the
party’s identity.
DIGITAL MILLENNIUM COPYRIGHT ACT primarily implements
treaties of the WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ORGANIZATION (WIPO).
Enacted in 1996, it criminalizes the circumvention of anti-piracy
features of software and calls for payments of fees to record companies
for webcasts of music.
DILATORY PLEA [PLEA IN ABATEMENT] in common law, a plea
not responsive to the merits of a controversy, but a defense that simply
delays or defeats the present action, leaving the cause of action
unsettled. If a defendant, by establishing the facts, can defeat the
plaintiff’s cause of action in whole or in part, or can obtain substantial
relief against the plaintiff, the plea is not dilatory, but on the merits.
This kind of plea has largely disappeared under modern practice.
Instead these defenses are now raised by motion or in an answer.
DILIGENCE attention to the matter at hand. DUE DILIGENCE or
REASONABLE DILIGENCE is that level of attention required by the
circumstances in order to avoid liability in negligence.
DILUTING THE SHARES see watered stock.
DIMINISHED CAPACITY in criminal law, the inability to have the state
of mind, or mens rea, required for the commission of a particular crime.
A successful defense of diminished capacity will usually result in
conviction of a lesser offense, not an acquittal. Compare insanity.
DIMINISHED RESPONSIBILITY see diminished capacity.
DIMINUTION IN VALUE a measure of damages for breach of contract
that reflects a decrease, occasioned by the breach, in the value of
property with which the contract was concerned. In a building contract,
for example, it is the difference between the value of the building as
constructed and its value had it been constructed in conformance with
the contract. Compare cost of completion; damages [EXPECTATION
DAMAGES]; specific performance.
DIRECT AFFINITY see affinity [DIRECT AFFINITY].
DIRECT ATTACK a proceeding instituted to amend, vacate or enjoin
execution of a judgment; an attempt by appellants to avoid or correct a
judgment in a manner provided by law, as by an appeal. Compare
collateral [COLLATERAL ATTACK].
DIRECT CAUSE see cause [DIRECT CAUSE].
DIRECT CONTEMPT see contempt of court [DIRECT CONTEMPT].
DIRECTED VERDICT a verdict returned by the jury at the direction of
the trial judge, by whose direction the jury is bound. In civil
proceedings either party may receive a directed verdict in its favor if
the opposing party fails to present a prima facie case or a necessary
defense. In criminal proceedings, there may be a directed verdict of
acquittal, but not a directed verdict of conviction, which would violate
the defendant’s constitutional right to a jury determination of his guilt or
innocence.
DIRECT ESTOPPEL see estoppel [DIRECT ESTOPPEL].
DIRECT EVIDENCE proof based upon the witness’s own observations
that do not require any additional inferences to be drawn. Compare
circumstantial evidence.
EXAMPLE: Direct Evidence: Susan testified that she looked out into her
hallway at 4 A.M. and observed her neighbor Mae hitting her husband
with a hammer. Circumstantial Evidence: Susan testified that at 4 A.M.
she was awakened by screams and banging noises from the adjoining
apartment and the next morning found the injured body of Mae’s
husband in the hallway. Additional inferences need to be drawn to link
Mae to the crime of assaulting her husband.
DIRECT EXAMINATION see cross-examination [DIRECT
EXAMINATION].
DIRECTOR a member of a board of directors of a company or
corporation, who shares with others directors the legal responsibility of
control over the officers and affairs of the company or corporation. A
director has a fiduciary duty to the corporation and to its shareholders
to manage the corporation in a manner consistent with their interests.
DIRECT ORDER OF ALIENATION see marshaling [marshalling]
[DIRECT ORDER OF ALIENATION].
DIRECT REDUCTION MORTGAGE see mortgage [DIRECT
REDUCTION MORTGAGE].
DISABILITY state of being not fully capable of performing all functions,
whether mental or physical; want of legal capacity such as infancy,
insanity or past criminal conviction that renders a person legally
incompetent; one person’s inability to alter a given legal relation with
another person. Compare Durham Rule.
DISBAR to rescind an attorney’s license to practice law because of illegal
or unethical conduct.
DISCHARGE 1. to satisfy or dismiss the obligations of contract or debt;
2. the method by which a legal duty is extinguished. Compare
performance; rescission.
DISCHARGE IN BANKRUPTCY the release of the bankrupt from all his or
her provable debts, whether then payable or not, and debts founded on a
contract, express or implied; but not a release from debts specifically
excepted from discharge by the bankruptcy statute.
3. to release from custody, acquit. See sentence [SUSPENDED
SENTENCE]. Compare reprieve.
DISCLAIMER l. denial of a person’s claim to a thing, though previously
that person insisted on such a claim or right; 2. renunciation of the right
to possess and of claim of title; 3. denial of a right of another, e.g.,
where an insurer disclaims an allegation of liability against its insured
and thereby refuses to indemnify or defend the insured in a lawsuit
[DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY].
DISCONTINUANCE cessation of proceedings in an action where the
plaintiff voluntarily puts an end to it, with or without judicial approval.
Judicial approval may be required, depending upon each jurisdiction’s
rules of practice. Compare dismissal; nonsuit.
DISCOUNT a deduction from a specified sum; often used with
transactions in negotiable commercial paper in which the instrument is
bought at a price below its face amount to reflect the fact that the debt it
represents is not due until a future date.
EXAMPLE: Sidney regularly enters into contracts where he is not to be
paid until the work is completed. But Sidney needs the money before he
starts the work to purchase work materials and pay other debts. Because
the contracts represent obligations to pay by other parties, a bank is
willing to give Sidney the money that the contracts call for less a
discount. That discount mainly covers the difference in the value of the
money given to Sidney now versus what the money will be worth when
the bank is paid by the other parties, as well as a small profit margin for
the bank. The discount will also factor in that percentage of the
contracts which are not likely to be collected.
DISCOUNT BOND see bond [BOND DISCOUNT].
DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW measure of the present value of a future
income stream generated by a capital investment.
DISCOVERY modern pretrial procedure by which one party gains
information held by the adverse party, concerning the case; the
disclosure by the adverse party of facts, deeds and documents that are
exclusively within his or her possession or knowledge and that are
necessary to support the other party’s position. Common types of
discovery are depositions, interrogatories, production of documents
and requests for admissions.
EXAMPLE: Alina gets into an accident when her rear wheels stop for no
reason, causing the car to skid into a highway divider. In her lawsuit
against the car manufacturer, Alina uses the discovery procedure to
obtain memos and test-run results that the manufacturer used in
designing the car. Without discovery, Alina may not be able to acquire
that information.
DISCRETION the freedom of a public officer to make choices, within the
limits of his or her authority, among possible courses of action.
ABUSE OF DISCRETION see abuse of discretion.
DISCRETIONARY ACCOUNT in the securities trade, one in which the
customer gives the broker or a third party complete or partial discretion
to buy and sell securities. Such discretion typically extends to selection,
price, timing, and amount purchased.
JUDICIAL DISCRETION the reasonable use of judicial power, i.e., the
court’s freedom to decide within the bounds of law and fact.
EXAMPLE: Jason, a juvenile, is charged with an assault upon another
teenager. In Jason’s state, the law provides the juvenile judge with the
judicial discretion to have the case heard in the juvenile court or to
transfer the case to an adult court. Previous cases and the law itself
establish certain standards to use in determining whether a transfer is
appropriate, but the judge has the discretion to decide which court shall
hear the matter. The decision, though, may be appealed to a higher
court.
LEGAL DISCRETION the use of one of several equally satisfactory
provisions of law.
PROSECUTORIAL DISCRETION the wide range of alternatives for a
prosecutor in criminal cases, including decision to prosecute, particular
charges to be brought, bargaining, mode of trial conduct,
recommendations for sentencing, parole, etc.
DISCRIMINATION the unequal treatment of parties who are similarly
situated. Federal law prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, sex,
nationality, religion, and age in matters of employment, housing,
education, voting rights, and access to public facilities.
DISHONOR to refuse, rightly or wrongly, to make payment on a
negotiable instrument when such an instrument is duly presented for
payment.
DISINHERITANCE the act by the donor that dissolves the right of a
person to inherit that property to which he or she previously had such
right.
DISINTERMEDIATION movement of savings from banks and savings
and loan associations into money market instruments, such as treasury
bills and notes.
DISJUNCTIVE ALLEGATIONS [DENIAL] those that charge the
defendant with either one act or another. The word “or” may not leave
the averment uncertain as to which of two or more things is meant. An
allegation that charges the commission of a crime by one act “or”
another is defective if it does not clearly inform the defendant of the
charge so that a defense can be prepared to meet it. The same standard
is applied to pleadings in civil cases, where both disjunctive allegations
and disjunctive denials generally constitute defective pleadings and are
therefore inadmissible.
DISMISS to terminate a case or some part of it. Before or during the trial
of a civil action, the suit may be dismissed voluntarily by the plaintiff,
or involuntarily by the court upon defendant’s motion to dismiss the
complaint or any count thereof. See demurrer.
DISMISSAL a cancellation. Dismissal of a motion is a denial of the
motion. Dismissal of a complaint or a related count terminates
proceedings on the claim asserted in the complaint. Dismissal of an
appeal places the parties in the condition as if there had been no appeal,
confirming the judgment of the lower court.
DISMISSAL WITH PREJUDICE usually an adjudication upon the merits that
operates as a bar to future action by preventing plaintiff from making
further attempts at a claim based upon the same facts.
EXAMPLE: Jorge brings a lawsuit against a company, claiming that it
never refunded his money for an item he returned. The company shows
the judge a check made payable to Jorge and cashed by him, with a
large notation on the check that it was payment for the return of the
item. Jorge then tries to make an additional claim that the company
owes him more money for other reasons. The judge will usually dismiss
with prejudice Jorge’s claim for the refund price alone and instruct him
to file a separate claim if he is seeking more money. The “with
prejudice” aspect of the court’s decision means that Jorge can never
again sue on the same claim unless he successfully appeals the decision.
DISMISSAL WITHOUT PREJUDICE such a dismissal is not on the merits
and does not bar a subsequent suit on the same cause of action, nor
affect any right or remedy of the parties.
DISORDERLY CONDUCT generic term embracing minor offenses that
are generally below the grade of misdemeanor, but that nevertheless are
somewhat criminal; broadly signifies conduct that tends to breach the
peace or endanger the morals, safety or health of the community.
DISORDERLY HOUSE see prostitution.
DISPARAGEMENT the tort of discrediting a person’s business (such as
the quality of the merchandise) to third persons resulting in economic
injury. Also applies to calling into question a person’s title to property.
An injurious falsehood applying to things is disparagement and
applying to persons is defamation. See bait and switch.
DISPOSITION 1. the giving up of anything; often used in reference to a
testamentary proceeding, as in “the disposition of the estate”; 2. courts
“dispose of” cases, i.e., determine the rights of the parties or otherwise
terminate the proceedings; 3. In criminal law, the sentence of the
defendant is the disposition.
DISPOSSESS to oust, eject or exclude another from the possession of
lands or premises, whether by legal process (as where a landlord
lawfully evicts a tenant) or wrongfully. Compare disseisin.
DISPUTABLE PRESUMPTION see presumption [REBUTTABLE
PRESUMPTION].
DISQUALIFICATION the inability to perform some act due to the
existence of factors rendering the performance improper or
inappropriate. For instance, a judge may be disqualified from hearing a
particular case because of having previously represented one of the
parties involved.
DISSEISIN l. the act of wrongfully depriving a person of seisin of land;
the taking of possession of land under claim or color of title; 2. any act,
with or without the owner’s consent, the necessary effect of which is to
divest him of the estate.
DISSENT 1. to disagree; 2. a reasoned opinion that differs from that of the
majority of the court.
DISSENTING OPINION see opinion [DISSENTING OPINION].
DISSOLUTION in corporation law, the end of the legal existence of a
corporation, whether by expiration of charter, decree of court, act of
legislature, vote of shareholders, or other means.
DISTINGUISH to demonstrate that an apparently similar case is so
sufficiently different from the case at hand that it is of limited value as
precedent.
DISTRAINER see distress [DISTRAINER]. Also spelled distrainor.
DISTRAINT see distress.
DISTRESS the act or process of DISTRAINT, by which a person (the
DISTRAINER), without prior court approval, seizes the personal
property of another in satisfaction of a claim, as a pledge for
performance of a duty or in reparation of an injury. Where goods are
seized in satisfaction of a claim, the distrainer may hold the goods until
the claim is paid and, failing payment, may sell them in satisfaction.
The person whose goods are distrained has recourse against the
wrongful distrainer in replevin.
EXAMPLE: A warehouseman stores goods for a farmer. When the farmer
fails to pay the storage costs for over a year, the warehouseman seizes in
distress whatever goods the farmer presently has in the warehouse. If
the farmer does not then pay for the storage charges that are past due,
the warehouseman can sell the goods, take out what he is owed and
refund the amount remaining to the farmer.
Originally, distress was a landlord’s remedy; see lien [LANDLORD’S
LIEN], distinguishable from attachment, which is a court-ordered
seizure of property. See impounding; garnishment.
DISTRESS, EMOTIONAL see emotional distress.
DISTRIBUTION a payment of yield in cash or in property to one entitled
to such payment.
EXAMPLE: At the end of every three months, a corporation distributes
dividends to all of its shareholders. A distribution takes place whether
the dividends represent checks, an increase in the number of shares each
shareholder has, or any other method of payment.
DISTRICT ATTORNEY an officer of the governmental body under which
he or she is operating, such as a state, county, or municipality, with the
duty to prosecute all those accused of crimes. A district attorney will
frequently have assistants who are similarly empowered. In the federal
government, district attorneys are called UNITED STATES ATTORNEYS.
DISTRICT COURT l. a court, established by the U.S. Constitution,
having territorial jurisdiction over a district that may include a whole
state or part of it. A district court has original jurisdiction, exclusive of
courts of the individual states, over all offenses against laws of the
United States, and is a court of general jurisdiction for suits between
litigants of different states. See diversity of citizenship; federal
question jurisdiction. 2. an inferior court in several states having
limited jurisdiction to try certain minor cases.
DISTURBANCE OF THE PEACE any public act that molests inhabitants
or that excites fear among normal persons.
DIVERS many, several, sundry; a grouping of unspecified persons, things,
acts, etc.
DIVERSIONARY PROGRAMS see pretrial intervention [PTI]
[DIVERSIONARY PROGRAMS].
DIVERSITY JURISDICTION see diversity of citizenship.
DIVERSITY OF CITIZENSHIP the circumstance that grants to federal
courts original jurisdiction over cases and controversies between
citizens of different states or between a citizen of a state and an alien,
subject to a minimum jurisdictional amount (the value in controversy)
of $75,000.
DIVESTITURE 1. loss or surrender of a right or title or interest; 2. a
remedy by which the court orders the offending party to rid itself of
assets before the party would normally have done so. Divestiture, like
restitution, has the purpose of depriving a defendant of the gains of
wrongful conduct. It is a remedy sometimes used in the enforcement of
the antitrust laws.
EXAMPLE: One of the top three oil companies purchases the sixth largest
oil company. After a long investigation, the government determines that
the purchase will remove gasoline price competition in many states. If a
court agrees with the government’s position, it will order the larger
company to divest itself of the smaller company.
DIVIDEND a corporation’s profits or earnings appropriated for
distribution among shareholders.
CUMULATIVE DIVIDEND a dividend whose unpaid residue is added to the
following distribution.
DIVIDEND ADDITION life insurance in addition to the face value of the
policy, purchased with dividends of the policy.
EX-DIVIDEND see ex-dividend.
EXTRAORDINARY DIVIDENDS dividends of unusual form and amount,
paid at unscheduled times from accumulated surplus.
LIQUIDATION DIVIDEND dividend resulting from winding up affairs of a
business, settling with its debtors and creditors, and appropriating and
distributing to its shareholders a residue proportionate to the profit and
loss.
PREFERRED DIVIDEND fund paid to owners of preferred stock in priority
over that to be paid to another class of shareholders.
SCRIP DIVIDEND a dividend payable not in cash, but in certificates of
indebtedness that give the holder certain rights against the corporation.
STOCK DIVIDEND a dividend paid not in cash, but in stock.
DIVISIBLE CONTRACT see severable contract.
DIVORCE dissolution of the bonds of marriage. Compare annul.
NO-FAULT DIVORCE a divorce granted without the necessity of a spouse
guilty of marital misconduct. The most common no-fault ground is
voluntary separation for a period of time, which creates a statutory
presumption of incompatibility or irreconcilable differences. See
community property; equitable distribution.
SEPARATION [DIVORCE A MENSA ET THORO] (à me*n’-saW e*t thô’-ro@) Lat.:
from table and bed. A partial divorce decree, usually entered in the
course of divorce proceedings, which directs the parties to live
separately—indeed, forbids them to cohabit—but does not dissolve the
marriage.
DNA TESTING scientific evidence used in criminal cases and in
paternity suits. DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules contain
hereditary (genetic) information. The theory on which DNA testing is
based consists of the following: all cells in the human body (except red
blood cells) contain DNA; the structure of the DNA of a person is
identical throughout a person’s body; the DNA structure is constant
from a person’s infancy through their death; and, finally, that no two
people (except identical twins) have the same DNA. DNA can be
extracted from blood (white blood cells and plasma), skin, tissue,
sperm, saliva, vaginal swabs, mouth scrapings, bones, and hair. The
technique is widely accepted as scientifically reliable. While also
known as “DNA FINGERPRINTING,” the process has nothing to do with
fingerprints themselves but rather with the concept of uniqueness and
the ability to link an individual to a crime (or establish paternity). It is a
test of exclusion (proving that this could not have been the person) as
well as a test that can include a person as one of a percentage of a
population that could be the source. In the first case of a person
convicted of a crime by DNA evidence (through semen recovered from
a rape victim), bands from the defendant’s blood and the semen
“matched” and the probability of such a match occurring at random was
0.0000002 (or the chance that it did not belong to the defendant was 1 in
833,333,333). It is this last area—the probability calculation—that has
received the most criticism. Some courts exclude such calculations.
At the risk of oversimplification, the following terms frequently are
used when discussing DNA testing. Methods of DNA analysis are noted
below:
HLA DQ ALPHA [DQ ALPHA] refers to the PCR method. HLA stands for
human leukocyte antigen and DQ Alpha refers to the locus of the
antigens.
MITOCHONDRIAL DNA [mtDNA] a newer type of analysis used to identify
war remains, samples subjected to extreme conditions, or even unsolved
crimes. Older biological samples that lack nucleated cellular material,
such as hair, bones, and teeth, cannot be analyzed with older methods,
but they can be analyzed with mtDNA. Nuclear DNA must be extracted
for use in RFLP, PCR, and STR methods; however, mtDNA analysis
uses DNA extracted from mitochondrion. Also used in cases of disputed
maternity since mtDNA is inherited solely from the mother.
POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION [PCR] this method can analyze as little as
one-tenth of the biological material that is needed for RFLP. PCR is also
able to give quicker results; however, the results are less discriminating.
The PCR technique consists of extraction of the biological material,
amplification (replication), and then typing. It is an in vitro process
through which repeated cycling of the reaction reproduces a specific
region of DNA, yielding millions of copies from the original.
RECOMBINANT DNA TECHNOLOGY procedure used to join together DNA
sequences since a recombinant DNA molecule can enter a cell and
replicate there.
RESTRICTION FRAGMENT LENGTH POLYMORPHISM [RFLP] is a process that
breaks DNA into small fragments at specific points on the DNA chain
that are then measured. A disadvantage of the RFLP method is that it
requires a large amount of non-degraded DNA.
SHORT TANDEM REPEATS [STR] copies of an identical DNA sequence
arranged in direct succession in a particular region of a chromosome.
Short tandem repeats, or VARIABLE NUMBER OF TANDEM REPEATS [VNTR],
is a method which uses markers for short, repeating segments combined
with computer system analysis although visual detection is possible.
Y CHROMOSOME ANALYSIS genetic markers on the Y chromosomes are
especially useful for analyzing biological evidence, including
relationships among males or where there are multiple male
contributors, since the Y chromosome is passed directly from father to
son.
States are increasingly requiring mandatory submission of blood
samples from certain convicted persons for DNA identification and
placement in an information bank that can then be used in the event that
future crimes are committed. See CODIS.
DOB date of birth.
DOCK historically, criminal court enclosure wherein the prisoner was held
during trial.
DOCKET 1. a list of cases on a court’s calendar; 2. in procedure, a formal
record of the proceedings in the court whose decision is being
appealed.
DOCTOR-PATIENT PRIVILEGE see physician-patient privilege.
DOCTRINE OF WORTHIER TITLE see worthier title, doctrine of.
DOCUMENT any writing, recording, computer tape, blueprint, X-ray,
photograph, or other physical object upon which information is set forth
by means of letters, numbers, or other symbols.
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE a document having legal effect that is
offered as evidence. Prior to being admitted as evidence, the
authenticity of the document must be established by testimony as to
how the writing was produced or the circumstances under which it has
been kept.
DOCUMENT OF TITLE a bill of lading, dock warrant, warehouse
receipt, or order for the delivery of goods, or any other document that in
the regular course of business or financing is treated as adequate
evidence that the person in possession of it is entitled to receive, hold,
and dispose of the document and the goods it covers.
DOCUMENT, ORIGINAL see best evidence rule.
DOLUS see culpa.
DOMA see defense of marriage act [doma].
DOMAIN 1. land of which one is absolute owner. See eminent domain;
public domain; public easement; 2. DOMAIN [NAME] denotes an
Internet address representing a specific web page. URL stands for
“uniform resource locator” and represents the entire address. An
example of a URL is http://www.barronseduc.com/. The domain name
is barronseduc.com. See hyperlink.
DOMESDAY BOOK a record made in the time of William the Conqueror
(1066–87) consisting of accurate and detailed surveys of the lands in
England and the means by which the alleged owners obtained title.
DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP see civil union. Compare marriage.
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE physical abuse, including sexual abuse,
emotional abuse, or victim isolation by one person upon another
whether dating, married, or formerly in such a relationship. Most states
include family members or cohabitants of a residence under the concept
for purposes of legal remedies.
DOMICILE an individual’s permanent home or principal establishment.
Residence is not the same as domicile, since a person can have many
transient residences but only one legal domicile, which is the home
address to which he or she always intends to return for prolonged
periods.
EXAMPLE: As the result of a long and prosperous business career, Ricardo
has bought houses in Florida, New Jersey, Colorado and California. But
Ricardo spends most of his time at his house in New Jersey because that
is only fifteen minutes from his corporation’s headquarters. Ricardo’s
domicile is New Jersey and would remain so even if in one particular
year he spent more time at one of his other homes. Should he sell his
business and leave New Jersey to permanently live in California, his
domicile would then change.
The domicile of a business is the address where the establishment is
maintained or where the governing power of the enterprise is exercised.
For purposes of taxation, it is often a principal place of business.
DOMICILIARY an individual who is domiciled in a particular state or
country is a domicilary of that state or country. See domicile.
DOMINANT ESTATE [TENEMENT] property retained by an original
grantor when a particular tract is subdivided and a portion is conveyed,
and to which there attaches a right to some beneficial use of the
conveyed or servient estate or a portion of it. The owner of the retained
land (dominant estate) is said to have a right of easement in the servient
estate.
DOMINION having both title to and possession of property; having
control of both ownership and use.
DONATED SURPLUS see unearned surplus [DONATED SURPLUS].
DONATIO (do@-nä’-she@-o@) Lat.: a gift; donation.
DONATION see contribution.
DONATIVE INTENT voluntary intent on the part of a donor to make a
gift.
DONEE the recipient of a gift or trust; one who takes without first giving
consideration; one who is given a power, right or interest. Compare
bailee; trustee.
DONEE BENEFICIARY see third party beneficiary [DONEE
BENEFICIARY].
DONOR one who gives a gift; creator of a trust; the party conferring a
power, right, or interest.
DOUBLE DAMAGES see damages [DOUBLE [TREBLE] DAMAGES].
DOUBLE JEOPARDY prosecution or punishment twice for the same
offense, which is prohibited by the U.S. Constitution and by many state
constitutions.
EXAMPLE: Ray is charged with destroying government property. After a
long trial, a jury finds Ray not guilty. Immediately after the trial, new
evidence is discovered that unquestionably links Ray to the destruction.
Under principles of double jeopardy, the prosecutor cannot retry Ray for
the crime even with the new evidence.
See collateral [COLLATERAL ESTOPPEL].
DOUBT see reasonable doubt.
DOWAGER generally, a widow supported by the property of her deceased
husband. In real property, a widow who has a life estate in the real
property of her husband by her right of dower.
DOWER a life estate to which a wife is entitled upon the death of her
husband. At common law, the widow was entitled to one-third of all the
property in which her husband was seized in fee at any time during the
marriage [coverture]. Her dower is a freehold estate, and cannot derive
from an estate for years. Compare homestead rights. See curtesy;
inchoate dower.
Dower rights have been abrogated in many jurisdications or limited
to interests that the husband holds at his death. Where they still exist, a
wife can join in a conveyance and thereby give up her dower rights. See
widow’s election.
DOWNZONING see zoning [DOWNZONING].
DOWRY the money and personal property that a wife brings to her
husband in marriage.
DQ ALPHA see DNA testing [HLA DQ ALPHA].
DRAFT l. an order in writing directing a person other than the maker to
pay a specified sum to a named person. Drafts may or may not be
negotiable instruments, depending upon whether the elements of
negotiability are satisfied. Draft is synonymous with BILL OF EXCHANGE.
2. the preliminary form of a legal document (e.g., the draft of a contract
—often called “rough draft”); 3. the process of preparing or DRAWING a
legal document (e.g., drafting a will) or piece of proposed legislation; 4.
in a military context, conscription of citizens into the military service.
SIGHT DRAFT one that is payable on demand; a bill of exchange for
immediate collection.
TIME DRAFT a draft which is not payable until a specified future time.
For instance, a post-dated check is a time draft.
DRAGNET CLAUSE see mother hubbard clause [DRAGNET CLAUSE].
DRAM SHOP ACT a legislative enactment imposing strict liability upon
the seller of intoxicating beverages when the sale results in the harm of
a third party’s person, property or means of support.
EXAMPLE: Jake left a tavern after consuming an excessive amount of
alcohol. His drinking caused an accident. The victim of the accident
sues the tavern owner under that state’s Dram Shop Act. Since the act
imposes strict liability on the owner, he is liable even if he did not
realize or had no way of realizing that Jake was drunk.
DRAW l. to withdraw money from an account in a bank or other
depository; 2. to execute a check or draft for the withdrawal of money;
3. to prepare a draft of a legal document, such as a complaint, a deed or
a will.
DRAWEE one whom a BILL OF EXCHANGE (see bill; draft) or a check
directs to pay to another a specified sum of money. In the typical
checking account situation, the bank is the drawee, the person writing
the check is the maker or drawer, and the person to whom the check is
written is the payee.
DRAWER person by whom a check or BILL OF EXCHANGE (see bill) is
drawn; person directing payment by another by way of a draft.
DRAWING see draft [DRAWING].
DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED [DWI] the criminal offense of
operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
State law controls both the definition of “operating,” such as whether it
includes the actual driving of the car or merely sitting in the car, and the
level of intoxication needed in order to be found in violation of the law.
DROIT (drwäh) Fr.: a right; law; the whole body of the law.
DRUG ABUSE the repeated or uncontrolled use of controlled substances.
While possession or use of controlled substances may be a crime,
addiction to drugs is a disease that cannot be made a crime under the
due process clause of the Constitution. Drug abuse or addition is a
ground for divorce in some states.
DRUG COURT the coordination of treatment for substance abuse with
judicial oversight. In recognition of the link between substance abuse
and criminal activity, some progressive courts have embraced the
concept of stopping the illicit use and abuse of all addictive substances
and thereby curtailing related criminal activity. In a comprehensive
plan, the prosecutor’s office screens candidates who are judicially
approved for participation in treatment-based programs, coordinated
with job training, and pretrial, probation, and parole agencies. In
exchange for successful completion of the treatment program, the court
may dismiss the original criminal charge, reduce or set aside a sentence,
offer some lesser penalty, or offer a combination of these. Other
programs named “drug courts” may refer to focusing on expediting case
processing under expanding court dockets, clogged with drug-related
offenses. They may look similar, but they may not provide the
orientation toward treatment and judicial supervision.
DRUG LAW see generic [GENERIC DRUG LAW].
DRUGS see controlled substances; driving while intoxicated.
DUAL CITIZENSHIP concept whereby two different sovereigns within
their respective territorial confines may lawfully claim citizenship of the
same person and the person may claim citizenship to each of the
sovereignties. For an American citizen to be deprived of United States
citizenship the government must show the commission of an
expatriating act as defined by statute done voluntarily and with intent to
relinquish citizenship. Also refers to the fact that an American citizen is
a citizen of the United States and of the state in which the citizen
resides.
DUCES TECUM (du@’-che*s ta@’-ku@m) Lat.: bring with you. See subpoena
[SUBPOENA DUCES TECUM].
DUE CARE the degree of care that a person of ordinary prudence and
reason (a reasonable man) would exercise under given circumstances.
The concept is used in tort law to indicate the standard of care or the
legal duty one normally owes to others. Negligence is the failure to use
due care.
EXAMPLE: Basic construction trade usage mandates that a certain size
beam be used to support a certain amount of weight. In its hurry, a
construction company uses a smaller beam because it is all that is
available. The floor supported by that beam collapses, and three
workers are injured. The use of the smaller beam represents a failure on
the part of the company to use due care.
DUE COURSE see payment in due course.
DUE DATE time fixed for payment of debt, tax, interest, etc.
DUE DILIGENCE see diligence [DUE DILIGENCE].
DUE PROCESS OF LAW a phrase introduced into American
jurisprudence in the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the U.S.
Constitution; the principle that the government may not deprive an
individual of life, liberty or property unless certain rules and procedures
required by law are followed. The phrase does not have a fixed
meaning, but embodies society’s fundamental notions of legal fairness.
Specifically, the constitutional safeguard of SUBSTANTIVE DUE PROCESS
requires that all legislation, state or federal, must be reasonably related
to a legitimate government objective. The concept of PROCEDURAL DUE
PROCESS guarantees procedural fairness where the government attempts
to deprive one of his or her property or liberty; this requires notice and a
fair hearing prior to a deprivation of life, liberty or property.
EXAMPLE: Police in a municipality devise a scheme to produce a
confession from Randy, who was accused of murder. The trial judge
permits the prosecution to use the confession, and Randy is convicted.
On appeal, a judge could find that the scheme violates procedural due
process of law, based on the nature of the police scheme and the general
nature of the American judicial system, which looks to produce
convictions based on evidence acquired from sources other than the
accused. In essence, due process is that level of process which is
deemed fair based on a balancing of all interests.
DUI driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs. See driving while
intoxicated [DWI].
DUMMY a strawman, a sham.
DUMMY CORPORATION a corporation that has no business purpose other
than to provide protection from liability or the disclosure of the
principal behind its activities.
DUMMY DIRECTOR a director who serves in name only and has no real
control over the corporation’s activities.
DUMMY SHAREHOLDER a shareholder who owns stock in name only
and has no financial interest in the corporation.
DUMPING the sale of manufactured goods for a price lower than its fair
value; sale of commodities in foreign market at a price that is lower than
the price or value of comparable commodities in the country of their
origins. Under the ANTIDUMPING LAW, the United States may impose
special custom duties on foreign manufacturers that attempt to import
goods into this country for less than their fair value if an industry in the
United States is or may be materially injured. Also, discharge of waste
material into the environment.
DUPLICITOUS refers to a pleading that joins in the same count two or
more distinct grounds of action to enforce a single right. To allege more
than one distinct claim in the same indictment is duplicitous.
DUPLICITY the technical invalidity resulting from uniting two or more
causes of action in one count of a pleading, or multiple defenses in
one plea, or multiple crimes in one count of an indictment, or two or
more incongruous subjects in one legislative act, all contrary to proper
procedural or constitutional requirements. See also joinder;
misjoinder.
DURESS refers to conduct that has the effect of compelling another person
to do what he need not otherwise do. It is a recognized defense to any
act, such as a crime, contractual breach or tort, all of which must be
voluntary to create liability. See involuntary.
EXAMPLE: Ximao is held at gunpoint until she agrees to help some people
rob a bank. At her trial for the robbery, Ximao pleads duress and
explains what happened. If her version of the facts is accepted, her
defense of duress prevents a finding of guilty against her.
DURHAM RULE a test of criminal responsibility that states that an
accused is not criminally responsible if his unlawful act was the product
of mental defect. The Durham Rule was the first major modification of
the common law M’Naghten Rule but is no longer in force in the
District of Columbia (where it was adopted), having been superseded by
the American Law Institute’s Model Penal Code test. This new test asks
whether the defendant lacks substantial capacity to conform his conduct
to the requirements of law, and is now used by a number of
jurisdictions. See insanity.
DUTY 1. obligation of one person to another. 2. In tort law, duty is a
legally sanctioned obligation the breach of which results in the liability
of the actor. Thus, an individual owes a DUTY OF CARE to conduct
himself to avoid negligent injury to others. See due care. 3. In tax law,
a duty is a levy [tax] on imports and exports.
DELEGABLE DUTY a duty that the person under legal obligation is able to
transfer to another.
DUTY, LEGAL see legal duty.
DUTY OF PRODUCING EVIDENCE see burden of proof.
DUTY TO MITIGATE DAMAGES see mitigation of damages.
DWELLING HOUSE one’s residence; a structure or apartment used as a
home for a family unit; a house in which the occupier and his family
usually reside. In the law of real property, it includes everything
attached to or considered an accessory to the main building, such as a
garage or barn, and may consist of a cluster of buildings.
DWI see driving while intoxicated [DWI].
DYING DECLARATIONS see hearsay rule [DYING DECLARATIONS].
E
EARMARK Congressional provision setting aside a portion of revenue for
a specified project, program, or grant.
EARNEST in civil law, something of value given by one party to another
to bind a contract, usually a sales agreement; serves both as part
payment or performance and as a method of predetermining liquidated
damages for breach of the contract. On breach by buyer, seller retains
the earnest, while in seller’s breach, buyer is entitled to twice the value
of the earnest.
In common law, earnest often denotes a down payment, but unlike a
down payment, earnest is by definition forfeited on breach of contract.
EARNINGS AND PROFITS a tax term referring to the income of the
corporation that, if distributed to its shareholders, would constitute a
dividend to each shareholder.
ACCUMULATED EARNINGS AND PROFITS the amount of earnings and
profits from prior years earned by a corporation but not yet distributed
to its shareholders.
CURRENT EARNINGS AND PROFITS the earnings and profits of a
corporation earned during the current taxable year. For dividend
purposes, distributions to shareholders are deemed paid first out of
current earnings and profits.
EARNINGS REPORT see income statement.
EASEMENT a right, created by an express or implied agreement, to make
lawful and beneficial use of the land of another. Such use must not be
inconsistent with any other uses already being made of the land. An
easement is a privilege connected with the land and is therefore not a
possessory interest or fee.
AFFIRMATIVE EASEMENT an easement that allows its owner to do
affirmative acts on the subservient property, such as to use the
subservient property as a right of way.
DEDICATION see dedication.
EASEMENT APPURTENANT a pure easement, or easement proper, that is,
one that belongs to whomever owns the dominant estate to which the
benefit of the easement attaches. In contrast to an EASEMENT IN GROSS
(definition follows), an easement appurtenant passes with the dominant
estate to all subsequent grantees and is inheritable. See appurtenant.
EASEMENT BY IMPLICATION see IMPLIED EASEMENT (below).
EASEMENT BY PRESCRIPTION see PRESCRIPTIVE EASEMENT (below).
EASEMENT IN GROSS a personal privilege to make use of another’s land.
It is not appurtenant to a dominant estate and is therefore not assignable
or inheritable. See license.
EASEMENT OF NECESSITY one necessary for the continued use of the land
when a larger tract of land has been subdivided. If without the easement
either the grantee or grantor cannot make use of his or her property, the
existence of an easement of necessity is implied by operation of law.
EQUITABLE EASEMENT an equitable servitude, and therefore only
enforceable in equity. To be enforceable at law, there must be privity
between the grantor and grantee. As an equitable servitude, however,
privity is not necessary to enforce the easement so long as the
subsequent grantee has either actual or constructive notice of the
easement. Violation of this easement is remedied by an injunction rather
than money damages.
IMPLIED EASEMENT one created by operation of law from the particular
circumstances involved rather than by a written instrument. A QUASI
EASEMENT will be implied where at the time of the grant there existed
an apparent, permanent, continuous and necessary use of the land from
which it can be inferred that an easement permitting its continuation
was intended, as, for example, where a lot containing a driveway is
severed from the lot containing the house.
NEGATIVE EASEMENT an easement that restricts a landowner from doing
certain acts he or she would normally be permitted to do in connection
with his or her own land. See restrictive covenant.
PRESCRIPTIVE EASEMENT [EASEMENT BY PRESCRIPTION] an easement
that is acquired through the uninterrupted use of another’s land for a
period of time that would be sufficient to acquire title to the land by
adverse possession.
PUBLIC EASEMENT see public easement.
RECIPROCAL NEGATIVE EASEMENTS an implied restriction upon the use
of property that can arise where a common grantor of several adjoining
parcels (especially a subdivision) has failed to insert the restrictions
from prior deeds into deeds to parcels conveyed later. See license.
Compare run with the land.
EXAMPLE: When Sunbelt Housing Cooperative sold the first half of a
housing complex, they included a provision that no commercial
establishments would be allowed on any property owned by Sunbelt.
The contracts for sale on the second half of the complex included no
such provision. Still, a purchaser of a lot on the second half cannot set
up a psychologist’s clinic in his home. A court will usually imply a
reciprocal negative easement based on the sales contracts of the first
half of the complex, thereby limiting all structures throughout Sunbelt
to residential use.
EAVESDROPPING the monitoring of communications by a third party
without the knowledge of the communicating parties. See invasion of
privacy; wiretapping.
ECCLESIASTICAL LAW English law pertaining to matters concerning
the church. This law was administered by ecclesiastical courts and is
considered a branch of English common law. It was intended to
vindicate the dignity and peace of the church by reforming the
ecclesiastical state and persons, and all manner of errors, heresies,
schisms, abuses, offenses, contempts and enormities. Today, in equity
and divorce cases, courts still rely on the principles and doctrines
established by ecclesiastical law insofar as these principles are
consistent with relevant constitutional and statutory law. American law
specifically adopted the practice of granting alimony, as incident to
divorce, from English ecclesiastical law.
Historically, the ecclesiastical courts had undisturbed jurisdiction
over rights of marriage, actions for divorce, restitution of conjugal
rights, and testamentary and intestacy cases. There is, however, a
conflict of opinion as to whether ecclesiastical law has been adopted as
part of the common law of this country. Some courts hold that this code
of laws cannot be considered part of the common law since it is based
on a union of church and state that has no place in our legal system.
Other courts consider some of this law part of the common law,
especially if these laws afford a good rule of construction for a
particular American law. See canon, corpus juris.
ECONOMIC STIMULUS federal funds provided to generate economic
recovery in a recession by saving or creating jobs, providing energy
savings and infrastructure improvements, and generally restoring
confidence in the economy. See TARP.
ECU see Eurodollar.
EEOC see equal opportunity [EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
COMMISSION].
EFFECTS, PERSONAL see personal effects.
E.G. abbreviation for exemplia gratia; for example.
EGRESS see ingress and egress.
EIGHTH AMENDMENT one of the Bill of Rights passed in 1791
prohibiting cruel and unusual punishment and excessive bail and
fines. The ban against cruel and unusual punishment has been applied
against a state’s imposition of a penalty for the status of being addicted
to the use of narcotics, but the Supreme Court has given the state
courts great deference in determining what constitutes cruel and unusual
punishment in terms of sentencing for various crimes. However, the
amendment does limit the kinds of punishment that can be imposed,
proscribes punishment grossly disproportionate to the severity of the
crime, and imposes substantive limits on what can be made criminal and
punished as such.
EIS [EIR] see environmental impact statement [report].
EJECTMENT a legal action brought by one claiming a right to possess
real property against another who has adverse possession of the
premises or who is a holdover (tenant who remains beyond the
termination of a lease). In common law the action was originally
commenced by a lessee against an intruder. Later it became a
possessory action brought by the holder of legal title to recover
possession from one holding under an invalid title. Compare eviction.
EJUSDEM GENERIS (e*-yu@s’-de*m je*n’-e*r-ĭs) Lat.: of the same class. A
rule of statutory construction, generally accepted by both state and
federal courts, providing that where general words follow enumerations
of particular classes of persons or things, the general words shall be
construed as applicable only to persons or things of the same general
kind as those enumerated.
EXAMPLE: A state law forbids concealing on one’s person “pistols,
revolvers, derringers, or other dangerous weapons.” Jed is arrested
under that law for concealing a long-blade knife. Under the rule of
ejusdem generis, the law will probably not apply to Jed since “other
dangerous weapons” as used here implies firearms or, perhaps even
more narrowly, handguns.
Compare sui generis.
ELECTION the selection of a public official by the citizens of a country,
state, or other political body; the choice between two or more legal
rights, whether they arise under a statute, by contract, or otherwise.
ELECTION OF REMEDIES a choice of possible remedies permitted by
law for an injury suffered; a rule of procedure that requires the party to
make a choice among alternative and inconsistent remedies all of which
are allowed by law on the same facts. Once a choice is made, the
alternatives not chosen are waived. Thus, while the plaintiff may seek
the alternative remedies of specific performance or damages for a
breach of contract, he or she may not ask for alternative inconsistent
remedies such as rescission and damages, since rescission elects to treat
the contract as void and the request for damages seeks to enforce a valid
contract. Many jurisdictions do not require election of remedies until
late in the proceedings.
ELECTION UNDER THE WILL the principle that to take under a will is
to submit to all its provisions. Specifically, it consists of the choice of
accepting the benefit given under the will and relinquishing a claim,
such as dower, that one may have to a portion of the estate of another,
or retaining that claim and rejecting the request provided by the will.
ELECTION, WIDOW’S see widow’s election.
ELECTIVE FRANCHISE see franchise [ELECTIVE FRANCHISE].
ELECTIVE SHARE see right of election.
ELEGIT see fieri facias [ELEGIT].
ELEMENT an ingredient or factor, as the elements of an offense.
ELEMENTS the forces of nature: fire, air, earth, and water. References to
“caused by the elements” is used synonomously with “caused by an Act
of God.”
ELEVENTH AMENDMENT an amendment to the U.S. Constitution
effectively prohibiting the federal courts from hearing cases against a
state by citizens of that state or of another state unless the state consents
to be sued. The amendment is rooted in the doctrine of sovereign
immunity.
ELIGIBLE COMBINED PLAN see DB(k).
EMANCIPATION l. freeing of someone from control of another; 2.
express or implied relinquishing by a parent of rights in, or authority
and control over, a minor child.
EMBARGO prohibition on the transportation of goods into or out of a
country, usually done to control trade or in wartime.
EMBEZZLEMENT fraudulent appropriation for one’s own use of
property lawfully in his possession, a type of larceny that did not exist
in common law because it does not involve a trespassory taking; thus
it is a crime created by statute. Embezzlement is often associated with
bank employees, public officials or officers of organizations, who may
in the course of their lawful activities come into possession of property,
such as money, actually owned by others.
EXAMPLE: A bank teller is short of cash one month and takes some
money out of the deposits received with the full intention of returning it
in a few weeks. The intent to return the money, though, has no
relevance to the fact that the money was embezzled. The only defense in
this instance would be that the teller thought the money belonged to him
or that he had the owner’s consent to borrow the money.
Compare defalcation; misapplication [misappropriation] of
property; theft.
EMBLEMENTS 1. the right of a tenant of agricultural land to remove
crops that he or she has planted, even if the tenancy has expired before
harvest; 2. vegetable chattels such as corn, produced annually as the
result of one’s labor and deemed personal property in the event of the
death of the farmer before the harvest.
EMBRACERY the common-law misdemeanor of attempting to bribe or
corruptly influence a juror; also called JURY TAMPERING. See
obstruction of justice.
EMERGENCY ECONOMIC STABILIZATION ACT see TARP
[EMERGENCY ECONOMIC STABILIZATION ACT].
EMINENT DOMAIN the inherent right of the state to take private
property for public use, without the individual property owner’s
consent; but just compensation must be paid to the property owner. See
expropriation. Compare public domain; public easement.
EMOLUMENT profit derived from office, rank, employment, or labor,
including salary, fees and other compensation.
EMOTIONAL DISTRESS extreme personal suffering caused by the
intentional or negligent actions of another. Physical injury (or even
physical contact) is no longer a required element for the recovery of
damages. Monetary awards have been issued in cases of harassment,
sexual harassment, libel, and slander. INTENTIONAL INFLICTION OF
EMOTIONAL DISTRESS and NEGLIGENT INFLICTION OF EMOTIONAL
DISTRESS involve those two respective states of mind. Examples might
include a lab technician calling and deliberately falsely stating, “Your
lab results show that you have HIV” (intentional) versus the loss of a
coffin and its contents by an airline (negligent).
EMOTIONAL INSANITY see insanity [EMOTIONAL INSANITY].
EMPLOYEE SHARE OWNERSHIP PLAN [ESOP] a plan designed to
provide a retirement benefit and a stake in the corporation for the
employee. Such plans are also used by employees to purchase plants
that are being closed.
EMPLOYEE STOCK OPTION see stock option [EMPLOYEE STOCK
OPTION].
EMPLOYERS LIABILITY ACTS statutes specifying the extent to which
employers shall be liable to make compensation for injuries sustained
by their employees in the course of employment. Unlike in workers’
compensation laws, which have replaced these acts in many states, the
employer is made liable only for injuries resulting from his breach of a
duty owed the employee, i.e., his negligence. See assumption of risk;
Federal Employers Liability Act; fellow servants.
EMPLOYMENT RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF
1974 see ERISA [Employment Retirement Income Security Act of
1974].
ENABLING CLAUSE a provision in most new laws or statutes that gives
appropriate officials the power to implement and enforce the law.
EXAMPLE: A statute that provides extra money for public housing is
passed. The statute will include an enabling clause permitting the
Department of Housing and Urban Development to spend the money
accordingly.
ENACTING CLAUSE generally, the preamble of a statute, or the part
that identifies the statute as a legislative act and authorizes it as law.
Thus, “Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States in Congress assembled,” etc., is the enacting clause used
in Congressional legislation.
EN BANC (än bänk) Fr.: by the full court. Many appellate courts sit in
divisions of three or more judges from among a larger number on the
full court. Sometimes either on the court’s motion or at the request of a
litigant the court will consider a case by the full court rather than by
only a part of it. A matter reconsidered by the whole court after a part of
it has rendered its decision is called a REHEARING EN BANC, sometimes
spelled “en bank.”
ENCLOSURE land enclosed by something other than an imaginary
boundary line, i.e., a wall, hedge, fence, ditch or other actual
obstruction; also called a CLOSE.
ENCROACH to intrude gradually upon the rights or property of another.
An encroachment is any infringement on the property or authority of
another.
ENCUMBRANCE any right to, interest in or legal liability upon real
property that does not prohibit passing title to the land but that
diminishes its value. Encumbrances include easements, licenses, leases,
timber privileges, homestead privileges, mortgages, judgment liens,
etc.
EXAMPLE: A piece of land Raj wants is encumbered by a mortgage that is
greater than the stated value of the land. He purchases the property
anyway, believing that the value is understated and that one day he will
be able to sell the land at a great profit.
ENDORSEMENT see indorsement.
ENDOWMENT a permanent fund of property or money bestowed upon
an institution or a person, the income from which is used to serve the
specific purpose for which the gift was intended.
ENEMY COMBATANT designation under which a detainee is not
provided rights otherwise entitled to under the laws of the country
detained in. An enemy combatant is either (1) a person who has engaged
in or supported hostilities against the United States or its co-belligerents
who is not a “lawful enemy combatant.” A “lawful enemy combatant”
is defined generally as a member of the regular forces of a state party
engaged in hostilities against the United States; or (2) an enemy
combatant is a person who has been determined to be so by a competent
tribunal established under the authority of the President or the Secretary
of Defense. They are not considered to qualify under the Geneva
Conventions as prisoners of war.
ENFEOFF to create a feoffment. The term refers to an early common law
means of conveying freehold estates and has been used in some modern
deeds to signify a conveyance of title.
EN GROS (än gro@) Fr.: in gross (large) amount; total; by wholesale.
ENJOIN to command or instruct with authority; to suspend or restrain. One
may be enjoined or commanded by a court either to do a specific act or
to refrain from doing a certain act. See injunction.
EXAMPLE: Plastics Company has been disposing of its waste products in
an adjacent river for over a decade. Environmentalists finally determine
that some of the liquid waste contains a deadly carcinogen. A court
enjoins (i.e., forbids) Plastics from using the river for disposal based on
the environmentalists’ proofs.
ENJOYMENT substantial present economic benefit; beneficial use and
purpose to which real or personal property may be put; implies right
to use and to profits and income from use, rather than mere technical
ownership. In common usage, synonymous with use and occupancy;
usually infers possession.
ADVERSE ENJOYMENT see adverse possession.
COVENANT OF QUIET ENJOYMENT see quiet enjoyment.
ENJOYMENT, QUIET see quiet enjoyment.
ENLARGEMENT a rule of civil procedure permitting a court to extend
the expiration period for any act required or allowed to be done at or
within a specified time. Once cause is shown, the court may act in its
discretion with or without motion or notice if the period has not expired.
If the period has expired, the court can only act upon motion where the
failure to act was the result of excusable neglect. Certain of the time
periods found in specific rules may not be enlarged by this general rule,
but can only be enlarged by conditions within those rules themselves.
EN MASSE all together, as a group.
ENRICHMENT see unjust enrichment.
ENTAIL to create a fee tail; to create a fee tail from a fee simple.
ENTERPRISE any individual, partnership, corporation, or any union or
group of individuals associated in fact though not a legal entity. Some
states have expanded the meaning to include sole proprietorships,
business or charitable trusts, governmental entities, and illicit as well as
licit entities.
ENTIRETY see tenancy [TENANCY BY THE ENTIRETY].
ENTITY a being that exists for tax, accounting or other particular purpose,
such as a corporation, governmental body or an estate. A legal entity is
one that, while not a person, can sue, be sued and make decisions as an
individual could, e.g., a corporation.
ENTRAPMENT in criminal law, an AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE (see defense)
created either by statute or by court decision in the given jurisdiction
that excuses a defendant from criminal liability for crimes induced by
trickery on the part of law enforcement officers or other agents of the
government. To sustain the defense, the defendant must demonstrate
that but for the objectionable police conduct, he or she would not have
committed the crime, or that an ordinary, law-abiding citizen would
have been persuaded, under the same circumstances, to commit the
crime.
EXAMPLE: Kurt does not touch or go near anything related to drugs since
his conviction for drug dealing six years ago. One day, an undercover
police officer asks Kurt to buy some drugs. He refuses, but the officer
continues his request over several days and even offers to provide the
narcotics to Kurt on credit. Low on cash, Kurt accepts, acquires the
drugs and is then arrested. The officer’s conduct in continually pressing
Kurt after he refused on several occasions may constitute entrapment.
ENTRY, FORCIBLE see forcible entry.
ENTRY, UNLAWFUL see unlawful entry.
ENUMERATED POWERS express powers specifically granted by the
Constitution such as the taxing power and the spending power
granted to Congress. See inherent powers. Compare implied powers.
ENURE see inure.
EN VENTRE SA MERE in gestation; in the womb of one’s mother. In the
law of property, a person who is en ventre sa mere has the same rights
as, and is entitled to the same protections as, a person who has been
born.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT [REPORT] requirement
under federal and state laws for developers to file documents and
receive approval where projects may affect the environment. Such
documents must detail efforts to minimize adverse polution, disruption
to wildlife or traffic, or use of protected areas such as wetlands.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY [EPA] an agency of the
federal government charged with a variety of responsibilities relating to
protection of the quality of the natural environment, including research
and monitoring, promulgation of standards for air and water quality,
control of the introduction of pesticides and other hazardous materials
into the environment, and the like. See police power.
E. O. executive officer; also, executive order; ex officio.
EO DIE on the same day.
EO INSTANTI immediately; instantly.
EO NOMINEE Lat.: by that name.
EPA see Environmental Protection Agency.
EQ abbreviation for equity.
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION [EEOC]
see equal opportunity.
EQUALITY possessing the same rights under the same circumstances.
Achieving a balance; uniformity. See equal protection of the laws.
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY a term to signify an employer’s adoption of
employment practices that do not discriminate on the basis of race,
color, religion, sex or national origin. Such discrimination was outlawed
by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Title VII also created the EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
COMMISSION [EEOC] to implement equal opportunity policy by working
with local agencies.
EQUAL PROTECTION OF THE LAWS constitutional guarantee
embodied in the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution,
which states in relevant part that “No State shall . . . deny to any person
within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.” The essential
purpose of this constitutional doctrine is to ensure that the laws and the
government treat all persons alike, unless there is some substantial
reason why certain persons or classes of persons should be treated
differently.
EXAMPLE: Women and men who perform equal tasks in their jobs for the
state receive unequal pay. In a lawsuit seeking equal pay, the fact that a
question based on gender is raised forces the state to demonstrate a
compelling government interest to justify the distinction.
EQUAL RIGHTS AMENDMENT [ERA] a proposed amendment hoping
to eliminate sex as a basis for any decisions made by a state of the
United States. This amendment was never ratified by a sufficient
number of states to qualify as a constitutional amendment, but the basic
premise underlying the proposal has become an accepted standard in
many statutes and court decisions.
EQUAL TIME ACT [RULE] broadcast requirement that if a candidate for
public office is permitted air time, the station must afford equal
opportunities to all other candidates for that office. Compare fairness
doctrine.
EQUIPMENT see consumer goods [EQUIPMENT].
EQUITABLE according to natural right or natural justice; marked by due
consideration for what is fair and impartial, unhampered by technical
rules the law may have devised that limit recovery or defense.
EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION see equitable distribution.
See equity.
EQUITABLE CONSIDERATION see consideration [MORAL
[EQUITABLE] CONSIDERATION].
EQUITABLE DEFENSE see defense [EQUITABLE DEFENSE].
EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION 1. a just division of property among
interested parties; 2. the process by which, as part of a dissolution of
marriage proceeding under a no-fault divorce statute, the court
apportions between husband and wife all assets acquired by either or
both of them, whether owned jointly or individually, during the
marriage See alimony; community property.
EQUITABLE EASEMENT see equitable servitude.
EQUITABLE ESTATE see estate [EQUITABLE ESTATE].
EQUITABLE ESTOPPEL see estoppel [ESTOPPEL IN PAIS].
EQUITABLE RECOUPMENT in certain situations in which a taxpayer
erroneously pays taxes in one taxable year when they are properly
payable in a later year, this doctrine allows the taxpayer to recoup the
additional taxes paid by reducing his or her taxes payable in the later
year.
EQUITABLE RELIEF see relief.
EQUITABLE SEISIN see seisin.
EQUITABLE SERVITUDE a covenant that is enforceable only in equity.
For a covenant to be valid at law, as to remote grantees of the affected
property there must exist PRIVITY OF ESTATE (see privity) between the
covenantor and covenantee, but such a relationship is not necessary to
create an enforceable equitable servitude so long as the subsequent
grantee has either actual or CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE (see notice) of the
covenant.
EQUITABLE TITLE see title [EQUITABLE TITLE].
EQUITY generally, justice or fairness Historically, equity refers to a
separate body of law developed in England in reaction to the inability of
the common law courts, in their strict adherence to rigid writs and
forms of action, to consider or provide a remedy for every injury. The
king therefore established the court of chancery, to do justice between
parties in cases where the common law would give inadequate redress.
The principle of this jurisprudence is that equity will find a way to
achieve a lawful result when legal procedure is inadequate. Equity and
law courts are now merged in most jurisdictions, though equity
jurisprudence and equitable doctrines are still independently viable.
Equity also refers to the value of property minus liens or other
encumbrances. For example, one’s equity in a home with a mortgage
is the value of the property beyond the amount of the mortgage debt.
In accounting, equity refers to the ownership interest in a company as
determined by subtracting liabilities from assets. See balance sheet.
For incorporated business enterprises, equity is owned by the common
and preferred shareholders. If the corporation is publicly held, the
shares will be traded on a stock exchange or over-the-counter market
which together comprise the EQUITY MARKET.
EQUITY CAPITAL see securities [STOCK].
EQUITY OF REDEMPTION right of mortgagor to redeem his or her
property (save it from foreclosure) after default in the payment of the
mortgage debt, by subsequent payment of all costs and interest, in
addition to the mortgage debt, to the mortgagee.
ERA see Equal Rights Amendment [ERA].
ERGO (e*r’-go@) Lat.: therefore; consequently; hence; because.
ERISA [EMPLOYMENT RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT
OF 1974] a Congressional attempt to attack a multitude of problems
that were affecting employee benefit plans, especially the lack of
employee information and adequate safeguards concerning their
operation. Through various statutes and regulations, the act creates
minimum standards to assure the equitable character and financial
soundness of these plans.
ERRONEOUS involving a mistake; signifies a deviation from the
requirements of the law, but it does not connote a lack of legal authority,
and is thus distinguished from illegal. If, while having the power to act,
one commits error in the exercise of that power, he acts erroneously.
ERRONEOUS JUDGMENT one rendered according to practice of court, but
contrary to law, upon a mistaken view of law, or upon erroneous
application of legal principles.
ERROR a mistake; an act involving a departure from truth or accuracy. In a
legal proceeding such as a trial, an ERROR OF LAW furnishes grounds for
the appellate court to reverse a judgment. See assignment of error;
clerical error; harmless error; plain error; reversible error. See
motion [MOTION IN ERROR]; writ of error.
ESCALATOR CLAUSE that part of a lease or contract that provides for
an increase in the rent or contract price upon the occurrence of certain
conditions beyond the parties’ control, such as an increase in the cost of
labor or of a necessary commodity, or the fixing of maximum prices by
a government agency. Escalator clauses in leases may permit an
increase in rent whenever real estate taxes or interest rates rise. In a
divorce decree one’s alimony payments may increase as the cost of
living rises or when the ex-spouse who is paying alimony has a higher
income.
ESCAPE CLAUSE a clause in a contract permitting a party to renege on
its obligations under certain conditions without incurring a penalty or
other liability.
EXAMPLE: Stilton Harvest Corporation agrees to provide a bread
company with all the wheat it needs for one year. The agreement
includes a provision that, if the annual harvest for a group of states falls
below an established level, Stilton is relieved of its obligation.
ESCHEAT assignment of property to the state because there is no
verifiable legal owner.
ESCROW a written instrument, such as a deed, temporarily deposited
with a neutral third party (the ESCROW AGENT), by the agreement of two
parties to a valid contract. The escrow agent will deliver the document
to the benefited party when the conditions of the contract have been
met. The depositor has no control over the instrument in escrow. In
common law, escrow applied to the deposits only of instruments for
conveyance of land, but it now applies to all instruments so deposited.
Money or other property so deposited is also loosely referred to as
escrow.
ESOP see Employee Share Ownership Plan [ESOP].
ESQUIRE [ESQ.] in English law, a title below knight and above
gentleman. Commonly follows the name of an attorney in the United
States, as in Kristen Newlawyer, Esq.
ESSENCE see time is of the essence.
ESTABLISHMENT CLAUSE provision in the First Amendment of the
U.S. Constitution prohibiting enactment of laws pertaining to “the
establishment of religion.” It has been said that the establishment clause
means that neither a state nor the federal government may set up a
church; neither may pass laws that aid one religion, aid all religions or
prefer one religion over another. In the words of Jefferson, the clause
was intended to erect a “wall of separation between church and state.”
ESTATE 1. technically, the nature and extent of a person’s interest in or
ownership of land; 2. broadly, estate applies to all that a person owns,
whether real or personal property.
CONTINGENT ESTATE see contingent estate.
DOMINANT ESTATE see dominant estate [tenement].
EQUITABLE ESTATE an estate or interest that can be enforced only in
equity; applies especially to every trust, express or implied, that is not
converted to a legal estate by the Statute of Uses.
ESTATE IN FEE SIMPLE see fee simple.
ESTATE IN FEE TAIL see fee tail.
FUTURE ESTATE an estate in land that is not possessory but that will or
may become so in the future. Future estates are either vested or
contingent, and include remainders and reversions.
LEGAL ESTATE originally, an interest in land that was enforced by courts
of common law, as opposed to an equitable estate, enforced by courts
of equity.
NET ESTATE see net estate.
PRECEDING ESTATE see preceding estate.
RESIDUARY ESTATE see residuary estate.
SERVIENT ESTATE see servient estate.
VESTED ESTATE one either presently in possession or owned by a
presently existing person to whom (or to whose successors in interest)
the property interest will automatically accrue upon the termination of a
PRECEDING ESTATE Such an estate thus represents a present interest and
as such is neither subject to any contingency nor otherwise capable of
being defeated.
ESTATE AT SUFFERANCE see tenancy [TENANCY AT SUFFERANCE].
ESTATE AT WILL see tenancy [TENANCY AT WILL].
ESTATE BY THE ENTIRETY see tenancy [TENANCY BY THE ENTIRETY].
ESTATE FOR LIFE see life estate.
ESTATE FOR YEARS see tenancy [TENANCY FOR YEARS].
ESTATE FROM YEAR TO YEAR [PERIOD TO PERIOD] see
tenancy [PERIODIC TENANCY].
ESTATE IN COMMON see tenancy [TENANCY IN COMMON].
ESTATE IN COPARCENARY see coparcenary.
ESTATE OF INHERITANCE a common law species of land ownership
that could descend to heirs; a type of freehold estate that the owner can
both enjoy during his or her life and bequeath according to an
established order of descent. Estate of inheritance include estates in fee
simple absolute, fee simple conditional, fee simple determinable and
estates in fee tail.
ESTATE PER AUTRE VIE see per [pur] autre vie.
ESTATE TAX see tax [ESTATE TAX].
ESTOPPEL a restraint; a bar; arises where a person has done some act that
the policy of the law will not permit him or her to deny, or where
circumstances are such that the law will not permit a certain argument
because it would lead to an unjust result. In the context of contract law,
for example, one is estopped from denying existence of a binding
contract where he or she has done something intending that another rely
on his or her conduct, and the result of the reliance is detrimental to that
other person. Compare waiver.
EXAMPLE: Nelson convinces an associate to sign what appears to be a
valid contract which gives the associate the right to buy certain items
from Nelson. When the contract turns out to harm Nelson more than the
associate, Nelson tries to deny the validity of the instrument. A court
will find that Nelson is estopped (i.e., prevented) from raising that claim
since it was Nelson who initiated the offer.
AUTHORITY BY ESTOPPEL see authority [AUTHORITY BY ESTOPPEL].
COLLATERAL ESTOPPEL see collateral estoppel.
DIRECT ESTOPPEL the prohibition of the relitigation of an issue by two
parties who have previously litigated the issue and had it decided by the
courts. See collateral estoppel; res judicata.
ESTOPPEL BY DEED a bar that precludes a party from denying the truth
and legitimacy of the conveyance represented by a deed he or she has
given. It may be invoked only in a suit on the deed or concerning a right
arising out of it.
ESTOPPEL BY JUDGMENT see judgment [ESTOPPEL BY JUDGMENT].
ESTOPPEL BY LACHES see laches [ESTOPPEL BY LACHES].
ESTOPPEL IN PAIS [pá’-e@s] Old Fr: the country, the neighborhood. An
estoppel that arises out of a person’s statement of fact, or out of his or
her silence, acts or omissions, rather than from a deed or record or
written contract; also called an EQUITABLE ESTOPPEL.
MUTUALITY OF ESTOPPEL the doctrine that prohibits one party from
raising an issue or a matter which the other party is prohibited from
raising.
PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL see promissory estoppel.
ESTOVERS the right of the tenant, during the period of his or her lease,
to use timber on the leased premises for proper maintenance of the
property.
ET AL. (e*t äl) Lat.: and others; abbreviation of et alii.
ETHICAL see unethical.
ETHNIC CLEANSING a policy of removing a particular ethnic
population from a geographic area, such as by forced migration. Claims
are made that the policy establishes ethnically homogeneous lands but
others argue that it serves to remove a population that is a threat to those
in power. The practice is often violent and may involve genocide. See
crime against humanity.
ET NON (e*t no*n) Lat.: and not.
ET SEQ. (e*t se*k) Lat.: and the following; abbreviation of et sequentes or et
sequentia. Most commonly used in denominating page reference
numbers: page 13 et seq.
ET UX. (e*t u*ks) Lat.: and wife; abbreviation of et uxor. Used in old legal
documents such as wills or deeds; for example, “This will made by John
Doe et ux.”
EURO unified currency of most nations of the European Union. Replaces
units of exchange such as the French franc, the Italian lire, and the
German deutsche mark. The euro is intended to simplify pricing, stem
inflation, and strengthen the economic policies of the member countries.
EURODOLLAR a U.S. dollar held as a deposit in a European commercial
bank. Eurodollars were created after World War II by United States
foreign defense and aid expenditures. Since the dollar was backed by
gold, it became a popular reserve currency in Europe and among all the
trading partners of the United States.
EUTHANASIA Greek: easy death. The act or practice of painlessly
terminating the life of a person or animal. As applied to animals, it is
sometimes referred to as “HUMANE DISPOSAL.” As applied to persons, it
is accepted in some cultures but in the United States it may be treated as
criminal, subjecting those responsible to prosecution under the homicide
statutes. Two types of euthanasia exist.
ACTIVE EUTHANASIA refers to the act of putting to death. Also known as
“mercy killing,” it involves the termination of life as painlessly as
possible, such as by an injection of lethal medications. Courts are
struggling with this area of law which is also known as “ASSISTED
SUICIDE.”
PASSIVE EUTHANASIA involves withholding artificial life support, such as
breathing or feeding tubes. It is often called the “RIGHT TO DIE.”
An exception to prosecution has been developed in some jurisdictions
in which the termination of the life of an incurably ill patient is no
longer treated as criminal if done by a guardian or immediate family
member after consultation with an ethics committee of a hospital, and if
accomplished by the negative means of withdrawing life-support
systems or extraordinary medical care rather than by some affirmative
act. See brain death.
EVASION OF TAX generally applied to any of various fraudulent methods
by which a taxpayer may pay less than his or her proper tax liability.
EXAMPLE: As an independent consultant, Olivia works for many different
companies. Her scheme has each company pay her under a different
fictitious name. She then sets up bank accounts in each name to
facilitate cashing the checks. By that method, she evades her taxes
because the Internal Revenue Service is unable to locate any of the
fictitious individuals.
Evasion is to be distinguished from avoidance of tax, which denotes
the legal interpretation of relevant tax law to minimize tax liability.
EVASIVE ANSWER an answer that fails to admit or deny the allegations
set forth in the complaint.
EVEN DATE the same date
EVICTION the physical expulsion of someone from land by the assertion
of paramount title or through legal proceedings.
ACTUAL EVICTION an actual expulsion of the tenant out of all or some
part of the leased premises, and involving a physical ouster or
dispossession from the very thing granted. Actual eviction relieves the
tenant of any further duty to pay rent.
CONSTRUCTIVE EVICTION refers to circumstances under the control of
the landlord that compel the tenant to leave the premises though he or
she is not asked to do so by the landlord. The tenant may be deemed
constructively evicted if the premises are rendered unfit for occupancy,
or if the use and enjoyment has been substantially impaired. Where the
law of the jurisdiction permits the tenant to claim constructive eviction,
he or she is not responsible for further rent, but he or she must actually
vacate the premises.
PARTIAL ACTUAL EVICTION an eviction that the law may recognize as
having occurred when part of the leased premises has been rendered
unusable through the fault of the landlord. If the lease rental is not
apportioned by room, nor the premises partitioned in the lease
agreement, the tenant may not be responsible for any part of the lease
rental while actually evicted from a part of the leased premises, and he
or she need not vacate the habitable part of the premises.
RETALIATORY EVICTION eviction of a tenant based on the tenant’s good
faith complaints against the landlord. Such evictions against residential
tenants are illegal in many states. When a landlord seeks to evict a
tenant within a specified period of time after the tenant has filed a
complaint against the landlord, a presumption may arise that the
eviction is in reprisal or retaliation for the tenant’s complaints.
EVIDENCE all the means by which any alleged matter of fact, the truth of
which is submitted to investigation at judicial trial, is established or
disproved. Evidence includes the testimony of witnesses, introduction
of records, documents, exhibits or any other relevant matter offered for
the purpose of inducing the trier of fact’s (fact finder’s) belief in the
party’s contention. See best evidence rule; circumstantial evidence;
conclusive evidence; corroborating evidence; demonstrative
evidence; direct evidence; documentary evidence; extrinsic
evidence; hearsay; illegally obtained evidence; incompetent
evidence; indirect evidence; indispensable evidence; insufficient
evidence; intrinsic evidence; mere evidence rule; newly discovered
evidence; parol evidence rule; preponderance of the evidence;
presumptive evidence; real evidence; rebuttal evidence; reputation
evidence; suppression of evidence; traditionary evidence; weight of
the evidence.
EVIDENCE ALIUNDE see aliunde.
EVIDENCE DE BENE ESSE see de bene esse.
EX AEQUO ET BONO (ex é-quo@ et bo@-no@) Lat: from equity and
conscience.
EXAMINATION see cross-examination; [DIRECT EXAMINATION].
EXCEPTION an item that ought to be included in a category but that is
eliminated. Exceptions arise in numerous contexts in law: 1. statutory
exceptions are intended to restrain the enacting clause or to exclude
something that would otherwise be within it, or to modify it in some
manner. 2. an exception to a court’s ruling is an objection to such ruling
or the act of calling to the attention of a court an error made by the same
or a different court. 3. Exception is also used generally to mean the
withholding from conveyance of some estate or interest in the land
conveyed.
EXCESSIVE BAIL an amount of bail that is set at a higher figure than is
reasonably calculated to fulfill the purpose of assuring that the accused
will stand trial and submit to sentence if found guilty. Excessive bail is
prohibited by the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution
and by the constitutions of the various states. The prohibition against
excessive bails has been held to forbid a person from being capriciously
held, by demanding bail in such amount that there is in fact a denial of
bail where a right to bail exists. The prohibition against excessive bail
has been held not to confer a right to bail on anyone but to provide only
that if bail is permitted it may not be set at an excessive amount. See
detention.
EXCHANGE to give goods or services and to get goods or services of
equal value in return. Generally, a transaction is a sale where money is
received in return for the goods or services and is an exchange when
specific property susceptible of valuation is received. Exchange is
synonymous with BARTER.
EXCHANGE, LIKE-KIND see sale or exchange.
EXCHEQUER see court of exchequer.
EXCISE broadly, any kind of tax not applied to property or the rents or
incomes of real estate; a tax upon articles of manufacture or sale and
also upon licenses to pursue certain trades or to deal in certain
commodities. It is a tax imposed directly and without assessment and is
measured by amount of business done, income received, etc.
EXAMPLE: Brycen buys a new set of tires for his car, the price of which
includes a federal excise tax. The money generated by the tax is used for
road maintenance and other transportation expenses and is justified by
the rationale that anyone who buys tires must be using them on the
roads. The tax is a means of ensuring that users pay for related
government services.
EXCITED UTTERANCE a statement relating to a startling event or
condition made while the declarant was under the stress of excitement
caused by the event or condition. A hearsay exception is broader than a
present sense impression since it (1) need not describe or explain the
startling event or condition; it need only relate to it, and (2) need not be
made contemporaneously with, or immediately after, the startling event.
It is sufficient if the stress of excitement created by the startling event or
condition persists as a substantial factor in provoking the utterance.
There is no fixed time limit on when a statement is considered to fall
under this exception to the hearsay rule. Both a statement made
contemporaneously and one made hours later may qualify if the person
making the statement is still dominated by the nervous excitement and
has not yet entered into a reflective or contemplative state of mind. See
res gestae.
EXCLUSION an amount that otherwise would constitute a part of GROSS
INCOME (see income) but that under a specific provision of the Internal
Revenue Code is excluded from gross income.
EXCLUSIONARY RULE a constitutional rule of law that provides that
otherwise admissible evidence may not be used in a criminal trial if it
was obtained as a result of illegal police conduct. See fruit of the
poisonous tree doctrine.
EXAMPLE: The police unlawfully stop a car, order the driver to wait
outside, and proceed to search the vehicle. Twenty pounds of marijuana
are discovered in the back seat. Since there was never a lawful reason to
stop the car in the first place, the subsequent search of the car is
unreasonable and in violation of the Fourth Amendment of the
Constitution. The primary remedy today for the violation is to apply the
exclusionary rule, which bars the prosecutor from using the confiscated
marijuana to convict the driver of possession of the drug. In fact,
application of the rule will usually end any prosecution based on items
that were discovered but now must be excluded.
EXCLUSIVE USE see use [EXCLUSIVE USE].
EX CONTRACTU (e*ks ko*n-tra*k’-tu@) Lat.: arising out of contract.
EXCULPATORY refers to evidence or statements that tend to justify or
excuse a defendant from alleged fault or guilt. Contrast incriminate;
inculpatory.
EXCULPATORY CLAUSE a clause in a legal document that excuses a
party from liability for its acts other than those caused by willful neglect
or gross negligence.
EXCUSABLE NEGLECT the failure to perform a required act, usually
procedural in nature, because of unusual circumstances. The party
failing to perform the act is usually given the opportunity by the court to
cure his or her neglect.
EX-DATE see ex-dividend [EX-DIVIDEND DATE].
EX DELICTO (e*ks de*-lĭk’-to@) Lat.: arising out of wrongs. See action ex
delicto.
EX-DIVIDEND without a right to a declared dividend. When a stock
trades ex-dividend the buyer does not receive the declared dividend
because the date on which he or she will officially own the stock will
occur after the record date of ownership for purposes of receiving same.
A stock will trade ex-dividend during the settlement period, usually five
business days, between the execution of an order to buy or sell the
security by a broker and the date of settlement when the certificate and
funds change hands. The PAYMENT DATE refers to the date on which the
dividend is actually paid and is usually sometime after the EX-DIVIDEND
DATE (sometimes called simply EX-DATE) and the record date.
EXECUTE l. to complete, as a legal instrument; 2. to perform what is
required; 3. to give validity to, as by signing and perhaps sealing and
delivering. For example, a contract is executed when all acts necessary
to complete it and to give it validity as an instrument are carried out,
including signing and delivery.
EXECUTED fully accomplished or performed; leaving nothing unfulfilled;
opposite of executory.
EXECUTED INTEREST see interest [EXECUTED INTEREST].
EXECUTED SALE see sale [EXECUTED SALE].
EXECUTION 1. the process of carrying into effect a court’s judgment,
decree or order. It gives the successful party the fruits of his or her
judgment. For instance, when a party has won a judgment on his or her
claim, the judgment creditor can enforce or execute the judgment by
having the sheriff seize and sell the judgment debtor’s property and
then use the proceeds to pay the judgment. 2. in criminal law, the
process by which a sentenced defendant serves his or her sentence. For
instance, a person sentenced to ten years of imprisonment executes his
or her sentence by spending that amount of time in prison, unless
released earlier by parole. The term also refers specifically to carrying
out a death sentence. See capital punishment.
EXECUTION OF INSTRUMENT signing of a legal instrument such as a
deed or contract so that it is legally binding and enforceable.
EXECUTION SALE see sheriff’s sale [judicial sale].
EXECUTIVE AGREEMENT see treaty.
EXECUTIVE CLEMENCY the power constitutionally reposed in the
President, and by most state constitutions, in the governor, to pardon or
commute (i.e., reduce) the sentence of one convicted by a court within
his jurisdiction. Compare reprieve.
EXECUTIVE ORDER an order issued by the executive head of
government, such as the President of the United States or a governor of
a state, and that has the force of law.
EXECUTIVE PARDON see pardon.
EXECUTIVE PRIVILEGE the privilege of the executive branch of
government to refuse to disclose confidential communications, the
disclosure of which would impair its ability to function. The privilege is
based upon the doctrine of separation of powers, but it may be
overcome in criminal cases, if necessary, in the interest of fundamental
fairness.
EXECUTIVE PROCLAMATION see proclamation [PRESIDENTIAL
PROCLAMATION].
EXECUTOR [EXECUTRESS; EXECUTRIX] a person who either
expressly or by implication is appointed by a testator [one who dies
leaving a will] to carry out the testator’s directions concerning the
dispositions he makes under his will. When the appointee is a woman,
she is the executrix or executress. See personal representative.
EXAMPLE: Lane’s will names Nat executor of Lane’s estate. As executor,
Nat must make sure the provisions in Lane’s will are carried out, debts
against the estate are paid, and any money owed is collected. If there are
ambiguities in the will or the will is contested, Nat is responsible for
seeing that a lawsuit is either filed or answered. Nat is compensated for
his job, although that may be a small amount, and he is reimbursed by
Lane’s estate for any expenses.
EXECUTORY not fully accomplished or completed, but contingent upon
the occurrence of some event or the performance of some act in the
future; not vested; opposite of executed. An EXECUTORY CONTRACT is
one in which some performance remains to be accomplished.
EXECUTORY BEQUEST see bequest [EXECUTORY BEQUEST].
EXECUTORY INTEREST see interest [EXECUTORY INTEREST].
EXECUTORY SALE see sale [EXECUTORY SALE].
EXECUTORY WAIVER see waiver [EXECUTORY WAIVER].
EXEMPLAR nontestimonial indentification evidence such as fingerprints,
blood samples, handwriting samples, voice exemplars, and the like. See
search and seizure.
EXEMPLARY DAMAGES see damages [EXEMPLARY [PUNITIVE]
DAMAGES].
EXEMPT see tax exempt.
EXEMPTION a deduction allowed to a taxpayer because of his or her
status or circumstances rather than because of specific economic costs
or expenses during the taxable year.
EXAMPLE: Adnan and Emily are married and have three children. Federal
income tax laws allow the couple three exemptions, one for each child
on the couple’s joint tax return. The exemption reduces the amount of
income upon which the couple is taxed.
EX GRATIA (e*ks grä’-she@-aW) Lat.: out of grace; gratuitously. Describes
that which is done as a favor rather than as a required task or as of right.
EXHAUSTION OF REMEDIES a judicial policy or statutory
requirement that certain administrative or non-federal judicial remedies
be pursued by a litigant before a state or federal court will consider the
controversy.
EXHAUSTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES the doctrine of all courts,
adopted either as judicial policy or by statutory directive, that the courts
will not interfere with or review an administrative decision or process
until the available administrative channels of review have been
attempted. This requirement stems from the usual requirement that
courts review only “final” administrative actions. The doctrine avoids
piecemeal interruption of administrative processes, conserves scarce
judicial resources, and ensures that the expertise of administrative
agencies will be fully employed. In some extreme cases, where
irreparable harm to public or private interests may be caused by
honoring the doctrine, it will be held inapplicable.
EXHAUSTION OF STATE REMEDIES the practice of federal courts of not
intervening in matters where state administrative remedies are available
to the litigant seeking federal relief. This is a policy of comity and may
be excused when it would be unjust or inappropriate to await state
administrative consideration. The doctrine applies only to state
administrative remedies and not state judicial remedies except in cases
involving state prisoners seeking federal habeas corpus relief. In those
instances, the federal habeas corpus statute requires that state prisoners
first exhaust state judicial remedies, provided they are then currently
available. Even in the context of habeaus corpus petitions by state
prisoners, the doctrine of exhaustion is not absolute. If the prisoner can
demonstrate that resort to state remedies would be “ineffective,” he or
she need not exhaust; also the prisoner need not present the state with
more than one opportunity based on the same issue provided he or she
has pursued all available appeals in that previous state application. The
Supreme Court has held that exhaustion of state remedies is not required
when federal courts are asked to remedy a violation of one’s civil rights
pursuant to the Civil Rights Act.
EXHIBIT an item of real evidence that has been presented to the court.
EXIGENCY an emergency situation that excuses some particular
procedure or right from being followed or enforced. Thus, an exigency
may justify speeding to the hospital with a critically ill person, breaking
into someone’s home to secure shelter from life-threatening harm, or
dispensing with the warrant requirement to effect a search and seizure
under the Fourth Amendment. See exigent circumstances.
EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCES emergency situations or conditions that
the law recognizes as excusing compliance with some procedural
requirement or recognition of another’s property or other interests. Term
is most commonly used to refer to the variety of contexts in which a
valid search and seizure may be conducted without a warrant. If the
police action must be taken on a “now or never” basis to preserve
evidence, it may be reasonable to permit a seizure without obtaining
prior judicial approval. Exigent circumstances may be found when
substantial risk of harm to others or the police would exist if police were
to delay a search until a warrant could be obtained. The mobility of a
motor vehicle has been held in itself to create an exigent circumstance.
In every instance where a search or arrest warrant has been dispensed
with on grounds of exigency, probable cause must be present to justify
the intrusion.
EXIGIBLE demandable; capable of being required.
EXILE to force out, or cut off from membership or privileges; the
punishment, by a political authority, inflicted upon criminals by
compelling them to leave a city, place or country for a period of time or
for life.
EX-OFFENDER see criminal.
EX OFFICIO (e*ks o@-fĭ’-she*-o@) Lat.: from the office; by virtue of his office;
officially.
EX OFFICIO MEMBER one who is a member of a board, committee or
other body by virtue of his or her title to a certain office, and who does
not require further appointment.
EX OFFICIO SERVICES services imposed by law on a public officer by
virtue of his office.
EX PARTE (e*ks pär’-ta@) Lat.: in behalf of or on the application of one
party; by or for one party. An ex parte judicial proceeding is one
brought for the benefit of one party only, without notice to or challenge
by an adverse party. Therefore, in an ex parte proceeding the adverse
party and his or her evidence are excluded. For this reason, such
proceedings are not favored, and any relief obtained ex parte is subject
to speedy review.
EXAMPLE: Applications to install wiretaps on telephones are always made
ex parte, i.e., without notice to the person whose phone is sought to be
electronically surveilled. Otherwise, the person will know his or her
phone is wiretapped and avoid incriminating conversations. Because the
application is ex parte, requirements not usually insisted on must be met
to protect privacy, and the person who is recorded may challenge the
sufficiency of the application at a later opportunity.
EXPECTANCY future interest as to possession or enjoyment. In the law
of property, estates may be either in possession or in expectancy; if an
expectancy is created by the parties it is a remainder; if created by
operation of law it is a reversion. See contingent estate. Compare
vested.
EXPECTATION DAMAGES see damages [EXPECTATION DAMAGES].
EXPENSE any business cost incurred in operating and maintaining
property. For purposes of information and in reporting to shareholders
of publicly held corporations, expenses are calculated as the cost of
goods and services used in the process of profit-directed business
activities.
In tax law, expenses are costs that are currently deductible, as
opposed to CAPITAL EXPENDITURES (see capital), which may not be
currently deducted but must be depreciated or amortized over the
useful life of the property.LOBBYING EXPENSE those incurred in
promoting or evaluating legislation.
MEDICAL EXPENSE a limited deduction allowed to a taxpayer for
amounts actually expended during the taxable year for diagnoses, cure,
mitigation, treatment, or prevention of any disease or affecting any
structure or function of the body and associated transportation costs.
Expenses for medicine and drugs are allowed as a deduction only if
obtained by prescription.
MOVING EXPENSE deduction allowed to a taxpayer for the reasonable
expenses of moving his or her residence from one location to another if
such move meets certain specified technical requirements regarding
distance moved and length of stay.
ORGANIZATION EXPENSE a newly formed corporation or partnership may
deduct the costs of organizing the corporation.
PERSONAL EXPENSE in general, a personal living or family expense is not
allowable as a deduction from gross income. Certain expenses,
however, such as mortgage interest, certain taxes, bad debts, medical
expenses, and charitable contributions are deductible if the taxpayer
itemizes his or her deductions.
TRADE OR BUSINESS EXPENSE deduction allowed to a taxpayer for all
“ordinary and necessary” expenses incurred with respect to the
taxpayer’s trade or business.
EXPERT TESTIMONY [EVIDENCE] see expert witness.
EXPERT WITNESS a witness having special knowledge, skill or
experience in the subject about which he is to testify. Testimony given
by such a witness, in his capacity as such, constitutes EXPERT EVIDENCE
or EXPERT TESTIMONY.
EXPLOITATION the act of taking unfair advantage of some person or
situation. See sexual exploitation.
EXPORT l. to transport out of one country and into another; 2. the article
so transported.
EX POST FACTO (e*ks po@st fa*k’-to@) Lat.: after the fact. Refers especially
to a law that makes punishable as a crime an act done before the passing
of the law and that was innocent when done. An ex post facto law is
also one that makes a crime more serious than when it was committed,
inflicts a greater punishment, or alters legal rules of evidence to require
less or different testimony to convict than the law required when the
crime was committed. Such laws violate provisions of the Constitution
of the United States, which provide that neither Congress nor any state
shall pass an ex post facto law.
EXAMPLE: Knowing that he has no money in the bank, Ji writes a check
for $150 and is arrested for the crime. At the time of his arrest, the law
made it a crime to write bad checks only for amounts over $200. By the
time Ji is brought to trial, the amount that is necessary to make the
writing of a bad check criminal had been lowered to $100. Ji must be
tried under the law as it was at the time he was arrested and is,
therefore, not guilty. To prosecute him under the new, lower limit of
$100 would violate the ex post facto protection of the United States
Constitution.
EXPRESS to set forth an agreement in words, written or spoken, that
unambiguously signify intent. As distinguished from implied, the term
refers to something that is not left to inference from conduct or
circumstances.
EXPRESS AUTHORITY see authority [EXPRESS AUTHORITY].
EXPRESSIO UNIUS EST EXCLUSIO ALTERIUS (e*ks-pre*’-se@-o@u@’-ne@-
u@s e*st eks-klu@’-se@-o@äl-te@r’-e@-u@s) Lat.: the expression of one thing is the
exclusion of another. In construing statutes under this maxim, mention
of one thing within the statute is said to imply the exclusion of another
thing not mentioned. The maxim is an aid to construction and is
applicable where the contrast between what is expressed and what is
omitted enforces the inference that what is omitted must have been
intended to have contrary treatment. Thus a statute granting certain
rights to “police, fire, and sanitation employees” would be interpreted to
exclude other public employees not enumerated in the legislation.
EXPRESS POWERS see enumerated powers.
EXPRESS WARRANTY see warranty [EXPRESS WARRANTIES].
EXPROPRIATION the taking of private property for public purpose upon
the payment of just compensation, which is recognized as an inherent
power of the state over its citizens. See eminent domain.
EXPULSION see deportation [EXPULSION].
EXPUNGEMENT OF RECORDS a procedure whereby a court orders the
annulment and destruction of records of an arrest or other court
proceedings. Some jurisdictions provide that an individual arrested and
not convicted may apply to a court for an order of expungement and that
if such an order is granted the individual may regard the arrest and all
subsequent proceedings had as having not occurred in contemplation of
law. Court-ordered expungements may also be available as a remedy for
unlawful arrests. Many states permit an expungement remedy as a
means of removing civil disabilities following a period of good
behavior after a conviction. Even an expunged record may be used for
sentence enhancement and as a basis for denial of a federal firearms
permit. Compare sealing of records. See executive clemency, pardon.
EX REL. (e*ks re*l) Lat.: upon relation or report; abbreviation of ex
relatione. Legal proceedings that are initiated ex rel. are brought in the
name of the state but on the information and at the instigation of a
private individual with a private interest in the outcome. The real party
in interest is called the RELATOR. The action will be captioned “State of
X [or United States] ex rel. Y versus Z.”
EX-RIGHTS refers to stock sold without rights to purchase stock
subsequently offered by the same corporation. Rights normally have
value, since the new issue is usually priced at a discount from the
prevailing market price.
EXTENDED TERM see sentence [EXTENDED TERM].
EXTENDI FACIAS see fieri facias [EXTENDI FACIAS].
EXTENSION an increase in the date of expiration or due date for a term or
obligation. In a lease, an extension represents continuation of an
existing arrangement on the same terms, whereas a renewal may involve
new terms in a different lease instrument. In procedure, an extension of
time within which a pleading or process must be filed or completed
under the rules governing the courts of the particular jurisdiction.
EXTENUATING CIRCUMSTANCES unusual factors tending to
contribute to the consummation of an illegal act, but over which the
actor had little or no control. These factors therefore reduce the
responsibility of the actor and serve to mitigate punishment or the
actor’s payment of damages. Compare justification.
EXTINGUISHMENT a discharge of an obligation or contract by
operation of law or by express agreement.
EXAMPLE: Philippe signs a mortgage with a bank to purchase a new
home. After twenty monthly payments, he stops paying the bank. A law
in Philippe’s state provides that if a bank does not sue on a mortgage
where no payment has been made for five years, the obligation is
extinguished. By operation of that law, if the bank does not sue Philippe
within five years from the first payment date that he fails to meet,
Philippe is no longer liable on the mortgage.
EXTORTION l. in common law, the corrupt collection by a public official
under color of office of an excessive or unauthorized fee; punishable as
a misdemeanor. 2. under modern statutes the offense includes illegal
taking of money by anyone who employs threats, or other illegal use of
fear or coercion, to obtain money, and whose conduct falls short of the
threat to personal safety required for robbery. Extortion is used
interchangeably with blackmail and is commonly punished as a felony.
EXAMPLE: Joel threatens Ming that he will reveal certain aspects of her
past that would ruin her career unless she pays him $200 a month. Even
if what Joel threatens to say is true, the fact that he has threatened her to
obtain money constitutes extortion.
Compare bribery.
EXTRADITION the surrender by one state to another of an accused or
convicted person. A state’s chief executive has the right to demand from
the asylum state the return of a person who was accused of crime based
on probable cause. Extradition prevents the escape of fugitives who
seek sanctuary in another state. It enables the state in which the offense
occurred to swiftly bring the offender to trial.
EXTRAJUDICIAL beyond a court’s jurisdiction; not directly connected
with a court or its proceedings; e.g., a confession or an identification
made outside of court.
EXTRAORDINARY DIVIDENDS see dividend [EXTRAORDINARY
DIVIDENDS].
EXTRAORDINARY REMEDY see remedy [EXTRAORDINARY REMEDY].
EXTRAORDINARY RENDITION see rendition.
EXTREMIS see in extremis.
EXTRINSIC EVIDENCE external evidence. All evidence outside of the
writing, including parol evidence, may be considered by the court in
determining the true intent of the parties if there is any doubt or
controversy as to the meaning of the language embodying their bargain.
EXTRINSIC FRAUD see fraud [EXTRINSIC [COLLATERAL] FRAUD].
EX TURPI CAUSA NON ORITUR ACTIO (e*x tûr’-pe@käw’-zaW no*n ôre@-tûr äk’-she@-o@) Lat: no disgraceful [foul, immoral, obscene] matter can
be the basis of an action.
EYEWITNESS a person who can testify as to what he or she has
experienced by his or her presence at an event.
F
FAA see Federal Aviation Administration [FAA].
FACE VALUE the value indicated in the wording of the instrument. For
instance, the face value of a bank check is the amount the check is
written for. Compare market value.
FACIAL INVALIDITY see void for vagueness.
FACILITATION in criminal law, a statutory offense rendering a person
guilty when, believing it probable that he or she is aiding someone who
intends to commit a crime, he or she assists the potential criminal in
obtaining the means to commit the crime, and in fact such conduct does
aid the person to commit the crime.
EXAMPLE: A very irate man walks into a gun store, screaming loudly that
he is going to shoot someone for running a red light and destroying his
new car. The man demands to purchase a gun, and the owner allows him
to do so once the proper forms are filled out, even though the owner is
aware of the man’s state of mind. If the man then goes out and shoots
the person who ran the light, the store owner may be guilty of criminal
facilitation.
In common law, facilitation may give rise to liability for aiding and
abetting. Compare accomplice; conspiracy.
FACINUS QUOS INQUINAT AEQUAT (fät’-sĭ-nu*s kwo@s ĭn’-kwĭ-nät ῑ’-
kwät) Lat.: villainy and guilt make all those whom it contaminates equal
in character.
FACT an event or circumstance the actual occurrence or existence of which
is to be established by the evidence and determined by the fact finder.
See conclusion of fact; error [ERROR OF FACT]; mistake [mistake of
fact]. See ultimate facts.
FACTA SUNT PROTENTIORI VERBIS (fäk’-taW su@nt po@-te*n’-te@-ô’-re@
ve*r’-be@s) Lat.: the facts, deeds, or accomplishments are more powerful
than words.
FACT FINDER in a judicial or administrative proceeding, the person or
group responsible for determining the facts relevant to resolving a
controversy. It is the role of a jury in a jury trial; in a nonjury trial the
judge sits both as a fact finder and as a trier of law; in administrative
proceedings it may be a hearing officer or a hearing body. The term
TRIER OF FACT generally denotes the same role.
FACTO (fäk’-to@) Lat.: in fact; by a deed. See de facto.
FACTOR a person who receives and sells goods for a commission (called
FACTORAGE). He or she is entrusted with possession of the goods he or
she sells and generally sells them in his or her own name. The term also
refers to a garnishee in states where factorizing is the name for
garnishment. Compare jobber.
FACTOR’S ACTS the name of certain English statutes, which have also
been enacted in a number of states, whose general effect is to make a
factor’s [agent’s] possession of property or documents of title stand as
evidence of ownership to enable him or her to do all things the true
owner might do with respect to the property or title documents. The
owner thus becomes responsible for the factor’s actions. The purpose of
such statutes is to protect bona fide purchasers where the agent has
exceeded his or her authority by giving an appearance that he or she is
the true owner.
FACT, QUESTION OF see question of fact.
FACTS, PROBATIVE see probative [PROBATIVE FACTS].
FACTUAL IMPOSSIBILITY see impossibility.
FACTUM (fäk’-tu@m) Lat.: a deed, or accomplishment. With respect to a
change in a person’s domicile, the factum is the person’s physical
presence in the new domicile. In civil law the word factum distinguishes
a matter of fact from a matter of law.
FACTUM PROBANDUM (fäk’-tu@m pro@-bän’-du@m) Lat.: the fact to be
proved. See evidence.
FAILURE OF CONSIDERATION see consideration [FAILURE OF
CONSIDERATION].
FAILURE OF ISSUE termination of one’s bloodline. The words are most
often used in a will or deed to refer to a condition that operates in the
event either no children be born or no children survive the decedent.
These words, or the phrase “die without issue,” may fix a condition
whereby an estate will, in the event of failure of issue, pass
automatically to an alternative person or in an alternative manner
designated in the will itself. Unless the instrument indicated to the
contrary, the common law read the condition as operating ad infinitum.
This construction is termed INDEFINITE FAILURE OF ISSUE. Thus, if
children of the first taker themselves fail to leave children, the estate
will still go to the alternative. The first taker is regarded as possessing a
fee tail, and his or her descendants continue to hold the same limited
estate. A majority of American jurisdictions by statute have reversed
this presumption and construe “die without issue” as a DEFINITE
FAILURE OF ISSUE; i.e., the condition is satisfied fully if the first taker
has issue surviving at the time of his or her death. Alternative
expressions include “if he or she dies before he or she has any issue,”
“for want of issue,” “without leaving issue.”
FAILURE TO PROSECUTE see default judgment; dismissal; non
prosequitur.
FAIR COMMENT a plea by a defendant in a libel suit that the statements
made, even if untrue, were not intended to create ill will but rather to
state the facts as the writer honestly believed them to be. Generally, one
will not be held guilty of libel on the basis of honest and unintentional
mistakes of fact.
FAIR COMPETITION see unfair competition.
FAIR HEARING a statutorily authorized extrajudicial hearing granted
primarily where the normal judicial processes would be inadequate to
secure due process, either because a judicial remedy does not exist, or
because one would suffer grievous harm or substantial prejudice to his
or her rights before a judicial remedy became available. Thus, fair
hearings have been authorized as forums for the administrative
determination of a citizen’s rights in a number of contexts.
FAIR LABOR PRACTICE see unfair labor practice.
FAIR MARKET VALUE see market value.
FAIRNESS DOCTRINE a requirement that broadcasting stations present
contrasting viewpoints on controversial issues of public importance.
This doctrine imposes two affirmative responsibilities on the
broadcaster: (1) to present adequate coverage of controversial public
issues and (2) to ensure that this programming presents differing
viewpoints so that the public is fully and fairly informed.
FAIR TRADE LAWS state statutes that permit a manufacturer to establish
minimum resale prices that may not be varied by the wholesaler or
distributor. Such agreements do not violate the antitrust laws when
they are entered into under the provisions of state fair trade laws.
FAIR USE in federal copyright law, an insubstantial permitted use by
another of material protected by copyright.
EXAMPLE: Jenny copyrights an article that she publishes in a medical
journal. Although Jenny has the sole right to authorize copies of the
article, the fair use doctrine permits a teacher to make as many copies as
he or she needs if the teacher uses the copies for classroom discussion.
FALSE ARREST unlawful arrest; unlawful restraint of another’s personal
liberty or freedom of locomotion. It may be a criminal offense or the
basis of a civil action for damages.
FALSE IMPRISONMENT as a tort, the intentional, unjustified detention
or confinement of a person. Where the restraint is imposed by virtue of
one claiming legal authority to do so and an arrest occurs, it will be a
false arrest as well as a false imprisonment. Compare kidnapping.
FALSE OATH see false swearing.
FALSE PRETENSE the statutory crime of obtaining money or property by
making false representations of fact; also known as
MISREPRESENTATION.
EXAMPLE: A salesman tells Jackie that the diamond she wants to buy is a
perfect cut and therefore very valuable. In reality, the diamond has
many flaws and the salesman purposefully made contrary
representations. Jackie purchases the diamond based on the salesman’s
representations since she knows nothing about diamonds. When she
learns that the stone is flawed, she can sue the salesman for false
pretense in the sale.
See counterfeit; embezzlement; forgery; fraud.
FALSE [PUBLIC] ALARMS the offense of intentionally making a false
statement for the purpose of causing evacuation of a building or a
method of public transportation.
FALSE RETURN l. a return to a writ made by a ministerial officer (such
as a sheriff) in which there is a false statement that is injurious to a party
having an interest in the writ. For example, if a sheriff is supposed to
serve a summons and untruthfully claims on his or her return that he or
she did serve it, this would constitute a false return; 2. an incorrect tax
return in which there appears either an intent to deceive on the part of
the taxpayer, or at least negligence that is sufficiently serious to warrant
holding the taxpayer liable for his or her error.
FALSE SWEARING the giving of a false oath in connection with some
proceeding or matter in which an oath is required by law. It is a
common law misdemeanor and consists of an act that would amount to
perjury except that it is not committed in a judicial proceeding. See
affidavit.
FALSE VERDICT a manifestly unjust verdict; one inconsistent with the
evidence. When such a verdict is rendered, the court can enter a
judgment n.o.v. (notwithstanding the verdict).
FALSI CRIMEN see crimen falsi.
FAMILY COURTS see court [FAMILY COURTS].
FAMILY THERAPIST PRIVILEGE see marital communications
privilege.
FAMILY [WIDOW’S] ALLOWANCE an amount awarded to a widow
for support during the administration of her deceased husband’s estate,
regardless of whether the widow has any right in the corpus or income
of the estate.
FAMILY, CRIMINAL see organized crime.
FAMILY PURPOSE DOCTRINE a doctrine establishing tort liability of
the owner of a family car when that car is used by another member of
the family.
EXAMPLE: A mother explicitly tells her daughter not to use the car at
night but leaves a set of keys on the table. The daughter takes the car
one night and gets into an accident. The mother is held responsible for
any injuries under the family purpose doctrine, despite her admonitions
to the daughter.
FAMOSUS LIBELLUS (fä-mo@’-su*s lῑ-be*l’-u*s) Lat.: a scandalous libel. A
slanderous or libelous letter, handbill, advertisement, petition, written
accusation or indictment.
FANNIE MAE see mortgage market [FANNIE MAE].
FARM PRODUCTS see consumer goods [FARM PRODUCTS].
FAS see free alongside.
FATAL VARIANCE see variance.
FAULT generally, error. l. in describing people’s conduct, it is the
responsibility for or cause of wrongdoing or failure. 2. in describing
goods, it is a defect in either the quantity or quality of the goods.
FAVORED BENEFICIARY one who, in a will, has been favored over
others having equal claim to the testator’s bounty.
FBI see Federal Bureau of Investigation [FBI].
FCI see jail [FEDERAL CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION].
FDA see Food and Drug Administration [FDA].
FDIC see Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation [FDIC].
FEALTY in feudal times, loyalty sworn by the tenant to his lord.
FEATHERBEDDING in labor law, the unfair labor practice of creating
or spreading employment by unnecessarily maintaining or increasing
the number of employees or the time used to complete a particular job.
Minimum crew regulations on the railroad is a typical example. Unions
attempt to justify such practices on grounds of health and safety
although job security is their primary motivation. See labor
organization [union].
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION [FAA] an agency of the
U.S. Department of Transportation, charged with regulating air
commerce, promoting aviation safety and overseeing the operation of
airports, including air traffic control.
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION [FBI] an agency of the
U.S. Department of Justice, charged by law with investigating violations
of all laws of the U.S. government, except those expressly assigned to
other agencies.
FEDERAL CLAIMS COURT a court of the United States created in 1855
to hear and determine claims against the United States. The purpose of
the tribunal was to relieve Congress of the burden of disposing of such
claims through the enactment of private bills. At first the court’s
decisions were merely recommendations for congressional action but in
1866 its decisions were declared by Congress to be final. The TUCKER
ACT of 1887 expanded the jurisdiction of the court. The Supreme Court
determined that the court was an Article III court and that its judges
enjoyed life tenure. In 1982 Congress replaced this court with a new
UNITED STATES CLAIMS COURT “established under Article I”; the judges of
the new court hold office for 15 year terms and decide CONGRESSIONALREFERENCE CASES. These congressional-reference cases are cases in
which Congress asks the court to make findings of fact or
recommendations that Congress will then use in deciding whether to
afford a party legislative relief.
FEDERAL COMMON LAW the body of decisional law developed by the
federal courts, not resting on state court decisions. Before the decision
in Erie Railroad v. Tompkins, 304 U.S. 64, it referred primarily to the
decisional law that federal courts developed in diversity of citizenship
cases. After Erie, federal courts sitting in diversity cases have been
bound to follow the general (substantive) common law of the state from
which, respectively, each case arose. See preemption.
FEDERAL CORRECTIONAL FACILITY see jail [FEDERAL
CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION].
FEDERAL COURTS the United States courts (distinguished from the
courts of the individual states), including district courts (general courts
of original jurisdiction, which are the federal trial courts), courts of
appeals (formerly circuit courts of appeals, which are principally
appellate review courts), and the Supreme Court (the only court
created directly by the constitution, and the court of last resort in the
federal system). Other specialized courts in the federal system are court
of claims (hears suits involving allowable claims against the United
States government), COURT OF CUSTOMS AND PATENT APPEALS (reviews
customs court decisions), and CUSTOMS COURT (reviews decisions of the
customs collectors).
FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION [FDIC] created
by Congress in response to the bank failures of the 1920s and 1930s, it
is an independent agency of the federal government that preserves and
promotes public confidence in the U.S. financial system by insuring
deposits (but not securities, mutual funds, or similar types of
investments) in banks and thrift institutions for at least $250,000 per
depositor.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY [FEMA] see
Department of Homeland Security [DHS] [FEDERAL EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT AGENCY [FEMA]].
FEDERAL EMPLOYERS LIABILITY ACT [FELA] the federal law
imposing liability on railroads for injuries sustained by their employees
in the course of employment. It is based upon the federal government’s
power over interstate commerce. Compare Jones Act.
FEDERAL INSURANCE CONTRIBUTION ACT see FICA.
FEDERALISM a system of government wherein power is constitutionally
divided between a central government and local governments.
EXAMPLE: The United States Supreme Court decides that the Constitution
does not protect a person’s privacy from a certain police tactic. Under
the doctrine of federalism, though, a state court may nonetheless
interpret its state constitution as prohibiting the same police conduct.
The federal and state judicial systems are sufficiently separate so that a
state court can afford greater protection to its citizens than the federal
courts by a more liberal interpretation of its own constitution and laws.
The state courts must observe any minimum federal rights, however,
under the Supremacy Clause to the United States Constitution.
FEDERAL MAGISTRATE see magistrate [UNITED STATES [FEDERAL]
MAGISTRATE].
FEDERAL MAGISTRATE’S ACT OF 1968 see magistrate [FEDERAL
MAGISTRATE’S ACT OF 1968].
FEDERAL QUESTION JURISDICTION one kind of original
jurisdiction that allows federal courts to hear cases wherein the
application of something in the Constitution, laws or treaties of the
United States is being disputed. See also diversity of citizenship.
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM established under the Federal Reserve
Act of 1913 to hold cash reserves of member banks and to provide other
services, such as furnishing currency for circulation, facilitating
clearance and collection of checks, and issuing and redeeming
government obligations such as savings bonds. The functions of the
agency were expanded in 1933 and 1935 to place greater emphasis on
government control of the money supply, the credit structure and the
economy in general. Twelve federal reserve banks are located
throughout the country. All national banks are member banks; state
banks may join at their option.
FEDERAL TORT CLAIMS ACT an act passed in 1946 that confers
exclusive jurisdiction on United States district courts to hear claims
against the United States for money damages, for injury or loss of
property, or personal injury or death, caused by the negligent or
wrongful act or omission of any employee of the government while
acting within the scope of his office or employment, under
circumstances where the United States, if a private person, would be
liable to the claimant under the laws of the place where the act or
omission occurred. The act is a broad waiver of sovereign immunity,
although there are a number of qualifications on the waiver. Some state
governments have enacted similar legislation. See Tort Claims Act.
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION [FTC] a federal administrative
agency established in 1914 to protect consumers against unfair methods
of competition and deceptive business practices, including sales frauds
and violation of the anti-trust laws.
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION IMPROVEMENT ACT see
Magnuson-Moss Warranty Act.
FEE in real property, an estate. Fee, fee simple, and FEE SIMPLE
ABSOLUTE are often used as equivalents to signify an estate of absolute
ownership that can be sold by the owner or devised to the heirs;
however, the term is used to refer also to ownership that is qualified, as
in the case of a conditional or determinable fee, which are types of
estates that might last forever but are subject to termination upon the
happening of a certain event.
IN FEE outright ownership of real property; the ownership of all aspects of
title, including the ability to transfer the totality of such title.
EXAMPLE: Brianna conveys land to her brother in fee simple absolute.
The brother has complete ownership of the land and can do with it as he
pleases. If she conveys the land to him restricting its use to religious
purposes, that conveyance is called a determinable fee. The moment the
land is used for some purpose other than a religious one, it reverts to
Brianna or to whomever she designates.
FEE SIMPLE a freehold estate of virtually infinite duration and of
absolute inheritance free of any limitations or restriction to particular
heirs; also called FEE SIMPLE ABSOLUTE.
FEE SIMPLE CONDITIONAL see conditional fee [estate].
FEE SIMPLE DEFEASIBLE see determinable fee.
FEE SIMPLE DETERMINABLE see determinable fee.
FEE TAIL the estate created by a conveyance, by deed or will, to a person
“and the heirs of his body.” A fee tail establishes a fixed line of
inheritable succession and cuts off the regular succession of heirs at
law. It is a limited estate in that inheritance is through lineal descent
only, which, if exclusively through males is called FEE TAIL MALE, and if
exclusively through females is called FEE TAIL FEMALE. If the family
line runs out (failure of issue), the fee reverts to the grantor or his
successors in interest.
FELA see Federal Employers Liability Act [FELA]; Employers
Liability Acts.
FELLOW SERVANTS co-workers: employees engaged in common
pursuits under the same general control, serving the same employer,
engaged in the same general business and deriving authority and
compensation from a common source; defined for the purpose of the
FELLOW SERVANT RULE, which absolves an employer of liability for
injury to a worker resulting from the negligence of a co-worker. Fellow
servants were said to assume the risk of each other’s negligence.
Employers’ Liability Acts and Workers’ Compensation statutes
have abrogated the fellow servant doctrine.
FELLOWSHIPS see scholarships and fellowships.
FELONY generic term employed to distinguish certain high crimes from
minor offenses known as misdemeanors; crimes declared to be such by
statute or to be “true crimes” by the common law. Statutes often define
felony as an offense punishable by imprisonment for more than one year
or by death or imprisonment generally. The original common law
felonies were felonious homicide, mayhem, arson, rape, robbery,
burglary, larceny, prison breach (escape) and rescue of a felon. See
misprision of felony.
FELONY, MISPRISION OF see misprision of felony.
FELONY MURDER a homicide that occurs in the commission or
attempted commission of a felony; considered first-degree murder by
operation of this doctrine. In many modern statutes, only homicides that
occur in the course of certain specified felonies are felony murders. The
malice necessary to find someone guilty of murder is inferred from the
actor’s intent to commit a felony.
EXAMPLE: Alan and Kirk hold up a liquor store. The owner attempts to
trigger an alarm, and Alan fires at him with a pistol, intending only to
frighten him but unfortunately killing him. Even though Alan did not
intend to kill the owner, both Alan and Kirk will be guilty of the
owner’s murder under the doctrine of felony murder.
FENCE a structure erected in order to enclose real property. A fence may
be used to determine a boundary for purposes of trespass.
In criminal law, an individual who receives stolen property and
resells it for profit. A fence commits the crime of receiving stolen
property.
FEOFFMENT the name given in common law to the means of conveying
title to freehold estates, which required livery of seisin. At the site of
the land and in the presence of neighbors, the vendor would point out
the boundaries of the purchase and hand over to the vendee the
appropriate symbol of seisin. The method was used until the use of the
written deed came to be prescribed by statute.
FERAE NATURAE (fe*r’-ῑ nä-tu@r’-ῑ) Lat.: wild beasts of nature. Animals
of natural disposition in that, unlike domestic animals, they are
untamed.
FERTILE OCTOGENARIAN refers to a legal fiction that, for purposes
of the Rule Against Perpetuities, every living person is presumed
capable of having children as long as he or she lives, even though it may
be biologically impossible. The impact of this fiction under the rule
against perpetuities has been modified by statute in many jurisdictions.
FEUDALISM a system of government and a means of holding property in
England and Western Europe that grew out of the chaos of the Dark
Ages. Through a ceremony, called homage, in which mutual duties of
support and protection were promised, the vassal in effect gave his land
to the lord and the lord then had a duty to protect it and the vassal.
Though the vassal thenceforth owned no land, he held the land of the
lord as a tenant and retained a use in that land. The land that the vassal
held was called his feud, fief, or feudum. The relationship between the
lord and his vassals could become more indirect by the process of
subinfeudation, so that theoretically there could be placed between the
lord and his vassal any number of persons at different levels, each
serving as a link in the chain of relations between the lord at the top and
the least of the vassals. Eventually, the king became the ultimate lord
over all, and all land in England was held of him. Only in England was
feudalism the sole method of holding land, although it was the general
method elsewhere in Western Europe.
The feudal land holding system influenced all of the early common
law concerning real property, and despite the fact that the feudal system
never existed in the United States, it has played a vital role in shaping
modern land law.
FIAT JUSTITIA (fe@’-ät ju@s-tĭ’-she@-aW) Lat.: let justice be done.
FICA [FEDERAL INSURANCE CONTRIBUTION ACT] this Act
imposes a tax on employees and employers that is used to fund the
Social Security system.
FICTION, LEGAL see legal fiction.
FIDUCIARY a person having a duty, created by his or her undertaking, to
act primarily for the benefit of another in matters connected with the
undertaking; one who holds a position of confidence, as, for example, a
trustee.
FIERI FACIAS (fe@e*’-re@fa@’-she@-a*s) Lat.: that you cause to be made; a
common law writ to enforce the collection of a claim that has gone to
judgment and has become final. By this early English writ, a creditor
with judgment was, in effect, ordering the sheriff to enforce against the
debtor by seizure and sale of the debtor’s personal property to the extent
necessary to satisfy the judgment. At common law, the real property of
the debtor could not be sold at execution. Today, the law of execution is
for the most part statutory, and most state laws provide for a single writ
for the enforcement of judgments out of the real and personal property
of the debtor. Other common law writs made virtually obsolete by
modern statutory provisions include:
ELEGIT (e@-le@’-jĭt) Lat: that he has chosen; a writ resulting in the
appraisal and transfer of a debtor’s goods to his or her creditor, and, if
necessary to satisfy the judgment, the transfer of an interest in the rents
and profits from all (originally only a moiety) of his or her real
property.
EXTENDI FACIAS (e*x-te*n’-dῑ fa@’-she@-a*s) Lat.: you cause to be extended;
also known as “extent,” a writ calling for the setting off of lands of a
debtor for purposes of appraisal as to its sufficiency to satisfy the writ of
the creditor.
LEVARI FACIAS (le*-vä’-rῑ fa@’-she@-a*s) Lat.: a writ authorizing enforcement
of a judgment out of both the debtor’s goods and the profits and rents of
his or her land.
FIFO see first-in, first-out.
FIFTEENTH AMENDMENT the amendment to the United States
Constitution, ratified in 1870, which guarantees each citizen the right to
vote, regardless of race, color, or previous condition of servitude.
FIFTH AMENDMENT the amendment to the U.S. Constitution, part of
the Bill of Rights, that establishes certain protections for citizens from
actions of the government by providing (1) that a person shall not be
required to answer for a capital or other infamous crime unless an
indictment or presentment is first issued by a grand jury, (2) that no
person will be placed in double jeopardy, (3) that no person may be
required to testify against himself or herself, (4) that neither life, liberty
nor property may be taken without due process of law, and (5) that
private property may not be taken for public use, without payment of
just compensation.
FIGHTING WORDS those that by their very utterance, in the context in
which they are spoken, inflict injury or tend to incite the hearer to an
immediate breach of the peace.
In tort law, one who uses fighting words and thereby creates
reasonable apprehension of harm in another person may be guilty of
assault. See also defamation.
FIGURE see public figure.
FILE refers to both the physical collection of documents (such as
pleadings, motions, briefs, and other papers) (example: “Where is the
Katherine Nicholas file?”) as well as the act of delivering documents to
the proper authority (example: “Please file this brief with the court.”).
See filing.
FILIBUSTER see cloture [FILIBUSTER].
FILING the depositing of documents with the court or with other public
officials to become preserved as part of the offical record. Often
specific deadlines are imposed by which time the documents must be
filed. Failure to meet the deadline may result in the imposition of late
fees or may result in the document being excluded from consideration.
Court documents must be served on the opposing party. See service.
See also return [FILING].
FINAL DECISION [decree; judgment] a decision that settles the rights of
parties respecting the subject matter of the suit until the decision is
reversed or set aside; ends the litigation on the merits and leaves
nothing for the court to do but execute the judgment. Compare
interlocutory.
FINAL DECREE see decree [FINAL DECREE].
FINAL HEARING see hearing [FINAL HEARING].
FINAL INJUNCTION see injunction [PERMANENT [FINAL] INJUNCTION].
FINAL JUDGMENT see final decision; judgment [FINAL JUDGMENT].
FINAL ORDER see order [FINAL ORDER].
FINANCE CHARGES any charge for an extension of credit.
FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARY an organization such as a bank that
brings together lenders (in the form of depositors) and borrowers. Other
examples include savings and loan associations, credit unions, real
estate investment trusts [REITs] and various kinds of finance
companies.
FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAWS see assigned risk [FINANCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY].
FINANCIAL STATEMENT see balance sheet; income statement.
FINDER OF FACT see fact finder.
FINDER’S FEE a fee or commission paid for finding what a customer
desires. In merger activities, the finder either locates a buyer when the
client company wants to sell or locates a seller when the client company
is looking for acquisitions. In real estate activities, finder’s fees are paid
for locating property, for obtaining mortgage loans and for referring
buyers, sellers and mortgage loans.
FINDING the decision of a court on issues of fact. The decision’s purpose
is to answer questions raised by the pleadings or charges. It is designed
to facilitate review by disclosing the grounds on which the judgment
rests. Findings of fact are made by a jury in an action at law, or, if there
is no jury, they are made by the judge.
FINDING OF FACT factual determinations made by the trier of fact (court or
jury), or an administrative body, based upon the evidence which has
been presented to it. If the case is presented to a jury, the jury makes the
finding of facts, such as “Was the accident the fault of the driver?”
Otherwise, the judge or administrative officer will make the findings of
fact. When the jury returns a general verdict (“we find for the plaintiff ”
or “not guilty”), the factual basis of the jury’s verdict will not be known
and may not easily be ascertained unless there was only one issue of
fact in the case. When the jury returns a special verdict, it answers
specific factual questions which have been presented to it, such as “Did
the accident occur prior to July 5th?” As a general proposition, an
appellate court can only set aside a finding of fact made below if it
determines that the finding is clearly erroneous, i.e., that reasonable
people could not possibly make such a finding.
FINDING OF LAW a determination of the court as to the application of a rule
of law to particular facts. Also referred to as a CONCLUSION OF LAW.
EXAMPLE: Elon sued his employer for wrongful termination. The court
found that Elon did fall under the provisions of the state’s whistleblower
statute because his firing was a direct result of his complaint regarding
the company’s failure to provide safety harnesses to its employees.
FINE a sum of money imposed upon a defendant as a penalty for an act of
wrongdoing. The fine is payable to the public treasury as opposed to
restitution, which is payable to the victim of the wrongdoing. Modern
statutes favor restitution over fines and sometimes provide that courts
may not impose a fine if its satisfaction would interfere with the making
of restitution. The Court has held that a state has discretion in setting
punishment for state crimes and may impose alternative sanctions.
However, under the Equal Protection Clause, a state may not subject a
certain class of convicted defendants to a period of imprisonment
beyond the statutory maximum solely by reason of their indigency. It is
a denial of equal protection to limit punishment to payment of a fine
for those who are able to pay it but to convert the fine to imprisonment
for those who are unable to pay it.
FINGERPRINT unique line patterns on each finger that may be left when
the finger comes in contact with an object. If a suspect drank from a
glass, the glass may be dusted with powder that clings to the oils left by
the finger, and an impression may be lifted and later compared against
the suspect. No two people (except identical twins) have the same
fingerprints. Arrested persons are routinely fingerprinted. The prints are
classified and entered into a computer system known as AFIS
(Automated Fingerprint Identification System). Prints lifted from a gun,
for example, can be compared against the hundreds of thousands of
prints in the system for a possible match against a suspect. Note: the
term “DNA fingerprinting” does not refer to fingerprints but rather to
the science of DNA technology and its ability to link an accused person
to a particular criminal act. See DNA testing.
FIRM OFFER an offer in writing that states the offer is to be irrevocable
for a set time. As long as it is stipulated in a signed writing that the offer
is to be held open, it need not be supported by consideration to be
binding.
EXAMPLE: A new stationery business undertakes an enthusiastic effort to
acquire new customers and develop an excellent reputation. Pursuant to
that desire, it makes several firm offers to other local businesses,
guaranteeing that it will supply all the stationery the others need for
ninety days at a fixed price. The others can enforce that offer against the
new business at any time during the year, even though they provided no
consideration in return for the offer.
FIRST AMENDMENT the first of ten amendments added to the Federal
Constitution in 1791 by the Bill of Rights, it guarantees freedoms of
speech, assembly, press, petition, and the free exercise of religion. As
written, it applies to the federal government but has been applied to
states by the Fourteenth Amendment. Litigation under this
amendment has included the use of prayer in public schools, censorship
of the press, and the community’s right to regulate obscene materials.
See establishment clause; free exercise clause.
FIRST DEGREE see murder [FIRST DEGREE MURDER]; principal
[PRINCIPAL IN THE FIRST DEGREE].
FIRST DEGREE MURDER see murder [FIRST DEGREE MURDER].
FIRST DEVISEE the first person who is to receive an estate devised by
will.
FIRST IMPRESSION, CASE OF first discussion or consideration. A case
is one of first impression when it presents a question of law that has
never before been considered by any court, and thus is not influenced by
the doctrine of stare decisis.
FIRST-IN, FIRST-OUT [FIFO] a method of inventory valuation in
which cost of goods sold is charged with the cost of raw materials,
semi-furnished goods, and finished goods purchased “first” and in
which inventory contains the most recently purchased materials. In
times of rapid inflation, FIFO inflates profits, since the least expensive
inventory is charged against cost of current sales, resulting in “inventory
profits.” As a consequence, LAST-IN, FIRST-OUT [LIFO] inventory
valuation has become a more popular method, since it reduces current
taxes by eliminating inventory profits. See balance sheet.
FISC the treasury of a political entity.
FISCAL pertaining to the public finance and financial transactions;
belonging to the public treasury (called the FISC).
FISCAL POLICY the use of public finance and financial transactions to
achieve desired economic goals.
FISCAL YEAR any twelve-month period used by a business as its
accounting period.
FIT see unfit.
FITNESS see warranty [WARRANTY OF FITNESS].
FIXED ASSETS see asset [FIXED ASSETS]; balance sheet
FIXED CAPITAL the amount of capital permanently invested in a
business.
FIXED INCOME income that does not change; for instance, bonds paying
interest at a specified rate that does not change are fixed-income
securities.
FIXED INVESTMENT TRUST see nondiscretionary trust.
FIXED RATE MORTGAGE see mortgage [FIXED RATE MORTGAGE].
FIXED SALARY a salary that is set at a dollar amount and does not
increase or decrease as a result of certain events occurring or not
occurring, such as a level of business being done by the employer.
FIXING, PRICE see price fixing.
FIXTURE something that was once a chattel but that is attached to real
property in such a way that its removal would damage the property,
and that is thus considered part of the realty.
EXAMPLE: To install a new chandelier in the house, the occupant had to
reinforce the ceiling and attach extra bolts. A few years after the
installation, a new room is added that requires construction of a wall
near the chandelier. Removal of the chandelier will now require not
only a removal of the bolts but destruction of the new wall as well. If
the present occupants move, the chandelier must stay behind since it has
become a fixture of the house.
TRADE FIXTURE see trade fixture.
FLAGITIOUS corrupt; shamefully or scandalously disgraceful.
FLIGHT escape; leaving the scene of a crime by one who feels guilt, or
self-concealment to avoid arrest or prosecution after arrest. Compare
resisting arrest. See also abscond.
FLOAT checks that are in transit between banks and that have not yet been
paid; checks in the process of collection that remain conditional checks
in a depositor’s checking account until the checks are paid to the bank
in currency.
FLOATING DEBT any short-term obligation of a business, such as bank
loans due in one year and commercial paper. Government floating debt
consists of treasury bills and short-term treasury notes. Long-term
debt, such as treasury bonds, is referred to as FUNDED DEBT.
FOB see free on board.
FOIA see Freedom of Information Act.
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION [FDA] an administrative
agency of the Department of Health and Human Services that regulates
the safety and quality of foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, and
medical devices.
FORBEAR to refrain from doing an act. See forbearance.
FORBEARANCE the act of declining, usually for a period of time, to
enforce a legal right. For purposes of the law of usury, the term is often
used to refer to a contractual obligation of a creditor to refrain for a
specific period from claiming a debt that has already become payable;
such forbearance is in substance a loan for which a creditor may impose
a charge. In contract law, forbearance of a valid claim, if bargained for,
constitutes consideration.
EXAMPLE: A grandfather is so distressed by his grandson Brad’s smoking
habit that he promises Brad $1,000 if Brad discontinues smoking until
his 25th birthday. The grandfather dies when Brad is 23, but Brad still
refrains from smoking. At age 25, he requests the $1,000, but the
executor of the estate claims that Brad never promised anything in
return for the money. A court will find that Brad’s forbearance from
smoking constitutes consideration to support the contract and will order
the executor to pay.
FORCE physical acts or the threat of physical acts intentionally used to do
an act or to commit a crime.
DEADLY FORCE in criminal law, force that is intended or is likely to
cause death or great bodily harm. The doctrine of self-defense justifies
the use of deadly force only to repel deadly force. See self-defense.
UNLAWFUL FORCE in the law of torts, the use of force without the
consent of the person against whom it is directed, for which the user
may be liable. See battery.
FORCED HEIRS persons who cannot be disinherited, such as a person’s
spouse or children. In the United States, a spouse may elect to take a
share of a decedent’s estate, usually one-third, instead of taking what
the decedent has given the spouse under a last will and testament. Civil
law countries such as France and Switzerland have forced heirship laws
under which members of a person’s family, including children, are
entitled to inherit a certain portion of the estate, regardless of the
person’s wishes as expressed in a last will and testament.
FORCED LABOR see involuntary servitude.
FORCED SALE see sale [FORCED SALE].
FORCE MAJEURE superior force. See act of God [nature].
FORCIBLE DETAINER see detainer [UNLAWFUL DETAINER].
FORCIBLE ENTRY entry on real property in the possession of another,
against his or her will and without authority of law, by actual force, or
with such an array of force and apparent intent to employ it that the
occupant, in permitting possession to be taken from him or her, must be
regarded as acting from a well-founded fear that resistance would be
perilous or unavailing. In many states a mere trespass without any force
will be considered forcible. Compare detainer [UNLAWFUL DETAINER].
FORCIBLE ENTRY AND DETAINER a summary statutory proceeding
for restoring to the possession of land one who has been wrongfully
deprived of the possession, usually the landlord.
FORECLOSURE generally, the termination of a right to property;
specifically, an equitable action to compel payment of a mortgage or
other debt secured by a lien. As to real property, foreclosure is
precipitated by nonpayment of the debt or other default under the loan
agreement, and leads to the court’s order that the property to which the
mortgage or lien is attached be sold to satisfy that debt. As a
consequence, the mortgagor’s equity of redemption is irrevocably
destroyed, subject to any statutory redemption rights that may survive
for a limited time in some jurisdictions. A security interest in personal
property can likewise be foreclosed by a JUDICIAL SALE (see sale
[FORCED SALE]) of the collateral.
FOREIGN belonging to another country or nation. Also, used to describe
another jurisdiction or state.
FOREIGN RELATIONS the area of domestic law of the United States
that involves decisions and policy concerning international affairs.
FOREMAN [FOREPERSON] OF A JURY the presiding member of the
jury and the person who speaks on the jury’s behalf when
communicating with the court or in rendering the jury’s verdict.
Normally the individual selected first or seated in the number one
position in the jury box is designated the foreperson, but sometimes the
jurors themselves elect their foreperson.
FORENSIC belonging to the courts of justice; indicates the application of
a particular subject to the law. For example, FORENSIC MEDICINE
employs medical technology to assist in solving legal problems.
FORESEEABILITY a concept to limit a party’s liability for the
consequences of his or her acts to effects that are within the scope of a
FORESEEABLE RISK, i.e., risks whose consequences a person of ordinary
prudence would reasonably expect might occur as a result of his or her
actions.
EXAMPLE: During the refueling of a ship, gasoline spills into the harbor.
A spark from a nearby welder ignites when it lands on a piece of highly
flammable fabric. The fabric falls into the harbor and a fire develops.
Consequently, the whole harbor burns down. Even though no fire would
have started had the fueling company been more careful, that company
is not responsible for the destruction of the harbor. The damage was an
unforeseeable consequence of spilling a small amount of fuel oil.
In a contract setting, a party’s liability for consequential or special
damages is limited to damages arising from the foreseeable
consequences of his breach.
In tort law, in most cases, a party’s actions may be deemed negligent
only where the injurious consequences of those actions were
foreseeable.
FORFEITURE the permanent loss of property for failure to comply with
the law; the divestiture of the title of property, without compensation,
for a default or an offense.
FORGERY 1. fraudulent making or altering of a writing with intent to
prejudice the rights of another; making of a false instrument or the
passing of an instrument known to be false; 2. fabrication or
counterfeiting of evidence.
FORM model of a document containing the phrases and words of art
needed to make the document technically correct for procedural
purposes; used by lawyers in drafting legal documents.
FORMAL CONTRACT see sealed instrument.
FORMA PAUPERIS see in forma pauperis.
FORMS OF ACTION technical categories of personal actions developed
in common law, containing the entire course of legal proceedings
peculiar to those actions. The forms of action are no longer in use, but
they continue to affect modern civil procedure and tort law.
Forms of action consisted of proceedings for recovery of debts, and
recovery of money damages resulting from breach of contract, or
injury to one’s person, property or relations. The forms can be classified
as (a) actions in form ex contract, including assumpsit, covenant, debt
and account; and (b) actions in form ex delicto (i.e., those not based on
contracts), including trespass, trover, case, detinue and replevin. The
result was a highly formal and artificial system of procedure.
FORNICATION generally, sexual intercourse of two unmarried persons of
different sexes, punished as a misdemeanor by statute in some states.
In some states, it refers to illicit sexual intercourse between a man,
whether married or single, and an unmarried woman. In some states,
illicit intercourse can be fornication for the party who is not married and
adultery for the party who is married. It is not a common law crime
and is not part of modern penal codes, though it remains a criminal
offense in many jurisdictions.
FORUM a court; a place where disputes are heard and decided according
to law and justice; a place of jurisdiction; a place where remedies
afforded by the law are pursued. See also venue.
FORUM NON CONVENIENS (fo*r’-u*m no*n ko*n-ve*’-ne@-e*ns) Lat.: an
inconvenient court. Under this doctrine a court, though it has
jurisdiction of a case, may decline to exercise it where there is no
legitimate reason for the case to be brought there, or where presentation
in that court will create a hardship on the defendants or on relevant
witnesses because of the court’s distance from them. The court will not
dismiss the case under the doctrine unless the plaintiff has another
forum open to him.
EXAMPLE: A truck lightly hits the rear end of a car, but, because of the
vehicle’s construction, the car bursts into flames and the driver is
seriously injured. The driver, who is from another state, wants to have
the case heard in his home state. The car company asks the court to
invoke the forum non conveniens doctrine and have the case transferred
to the state where the accident occurred. That request is granted because
the witnesses to the accident, as well as the actual scene, are both in the
other state, and it would be more inconvenient to have that information
brought to the driver’s home state than to have the driver go to the state
where the accident occurred.
FOUNDATION in evidence law, preliminary evidence necessary to
establish the admissibility of other evidence. A lawyer will lay a
foundation to establish the relevancy of evidence that does not
otherwise appear relevant to the matter at hand.
Also, an organization whose assets are dedicated to charitable
purposes. See charity.
FOUNDER one who provides the first gift to establish a charitable
institution, such as a college.
FOUNDER’S SHARES shares in a corporation or company issued to
the organizers and often carrying special privileges.
401(k) see retirement plan [401(K)].
FOUR CORNERS the doctrine that requires that the meaning of a
document be derived froms its entire contents as they relate to one
another, and not from its individual parts.
FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT one of the so called “Civil War
Amendments” to the Constitution in that it was ratified after the Civil
War; protects all persons from state laws that attempt to deprive them of
“life, liberty, or property, without due process of law,” or that attempt to
deny them equal protection of the laws. The amendment has been used
to extend the protection of almost all of the provisions of the Bill of
Rights to citizens of every state.
FOURTH AMENDMENT constitutional amendment guaranteeing the
right of persons to be secure in their homes and property from
unreasonable searches and seizures and consisting of the following
elements: (1) the issuance of a warrant upon oath or affirmation; (2)
upon probable cause, as determined by a neutral and detached
magistrate; and (3) particularly describing the place to be searched and
the items or persons to be seized.
The Fourth Amendment is most frequently encountered in cases
involving the use of illegally seized evidence, or fruits of the
poisonous tree, and is applied through the exclusionary rule. It was
initially incorporated in the Bill of Rights to counter the abuses from
searches conducted without warrants, with general warrants, or with
writs of assistance and designed to safeguard the public’s legitimate or
reasonable expectation of privacy. Such expectations of privacy extend
to a person’s home (in such areas as use of contraceptives, obscene
materials, or marijuana in a private residence), and to lesser extents, to a
person’s place of business, automobile, or even body. Courts have
upheld invasions of a person’s body in the areas of compulsory
vaccinations, blood tests, rectal and vaginal searches, and surgical
removal of a bullet. See search warrant.
FOUR UNITIES see unities.
Fr. abbreviation for French.
FRANCHISE 1. a special privilege that is conferred by the government
upon individuals that does not of common right belong to citizens. For
example, a municipality may grant to a local bus company a franchise
that will give it sole authority to operate buses in the municipality for a
certain number of years. 2. the right given to a private person or
corporation to market another’s product within a certain area. 3.
ELECTIVE FRANCHISE (sometimes called simply “the franchise”) refers
to the right of citizens to vote in public elections.
FRATRICIDE the murder of one’s brother.
FRAUD intentional deception resulting in injury to another. Fraud usually
consists of a misrepresentation, concealment or nondisclosure of a
material fact, or at least misleading conduct, devices or contrivance.
BADGES OF FRAUD see badges of fraud.
CONSTRUCTIVE [LEGAL] FRAUD comprises all acts, omissions and
concealments involving breach of equitable or legal duty, or trust and
resulting in damage to another. It is thus fraud that is presumed from the
circumstances, without the need for any actual proof of intent to
defraud.
EXTRINSIC [COLLATERAL] FRAUD fraud that prevents a party from
knowing about his or her rights or defenses or from having a fair
opportunity to present or litigate them at a trial. It is a ground for
equitable relief from a judgment.
EXAMPLE: Loni obtains a court order requiring a company to give her all
relevant information concerning a certain product that she claims
injured her. At trial, a judge finds her evidence insufficient and
dismisses her claim. Afterwards, Loni finds other documents in the
company’s possession that she never received but that would have
proved her case. The extrinsic fraud committed upon her gives rise to
both a suit against the company for the fraud and a right for Loni to
have a new trial with the new documents.
FRAUD IN FACT [POSITIVE FRAUD] actual fraud; deceit; concealing
something or making a false representation with an evil intent [scienter]
when it causes injury to another. It is used in contrast to CONSTRUCTIVE
FRAUD, which does not require evil intent.
FRAUD IN LAW fraud that is presumed from circumstances, where the one
who commits it need not have any evil intent to commit a fraud; it is a
CONSTRUCTIVE FRAUD or legal fraud.
FRAUD IN THE FACTUM generally arises from a disparity between the
instrument executed and the one intended to be executed, as for
example when a blind or illiterate person executes a deed when it has
been read falsely to him or her after he or she asked to have it read.
FRAUD IN THE INDUCEMENT intentional fraud that causes one to execute
an instrument, or make an agreement, or render a judgment. The
misrepresentation does not mislead one as to the paper being signed but
rather misleads as to the facts upon which the decision to sign is based.
FRAUD ON THE COURT occurs where it can be demonstrated, clearly and
convincingly, that a party has deliberately set in motion some
unconscionable scheme calculated to interfere with the judicial
system’s ability to impartially decide a matter by improperly influencing
the trier or unfairly hampering the presentation of the opposing party’s
claim or defense. Unlike common law fraud on a party, fraud on the
court does not require reliance.
INTRINSIC FRAUD fraudulent representation that is considered in
rendering a judgment.
LEGAL FRAUD see CONSTRUCTIVE [LEGAL] FRAUD (above).
FRAUDULENT CONCEALMENT see spoilation (of records)
[FRAUDULENT CONCEALMENT].
FRAUDULENT CONVEYANCE any conveyance made, or presumed to
have been made, with the intention to delay or defraud creditors, where
such intention is known to the party to whom the conveyance is made. It
is generally characterized by a lack of fair and valuable consideration
and is usually made by a debtor to place his property beyond the reach
of creditors.
FREE ALONGSIDE [FAS] a commercial delivery term that signifies that
the seller must at his or her own risk and expense deliver the goods to
the side of the transporting medium in the usual manner and obtain and
tender a receipt for the goods in exchange for which the carrier must
issue a bill of lading. Compare free on board [fob].
FREE AND CLEAR unencumbered. In property law, a title is free and
clear if it is not encumbered by any liens or restrictions; one conveys
land free and clear if he or she transfers a good title or marketable
title.
FREEDOM the state of being free; the absence of restrictions.
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION the right to peaceably assembly as guaranteed
by the First Amendment.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION general term referring to the freedom of press,
religion, and speech.
FREEDOM OF PRESS the right to publish and circulate one’s views, as
guaranteed by the First Amendment. Closely related to FREEDOM OF
SPEECH (below). See open court.
FREEDOM OF RELIGION see establishment clause.
FREEDOM OF SPEECH the right to express one’s thoughts without
governmental restrictions on the contents thereof, as guaranteed by the
First Amendment.
FREEDOM OF CONTRACT the liberty or ability to enter into
agreements with others, which is a fundamental right reserved to
citizens by the United States Constitution.
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT [FOIA] a federal law requiring
that, with specified exceptions, documents and materials generated or
held by federal agencies be made available to the public and
establishing guidelines for their disclosure.
FREE EXERCISE CLAUSE a provision in the First Amendment to the
United States Constitution providing that “Congress shall make no laws
. . . prohibiting the free exercise” of religion. The “free exercise clause”
guarantees against government compulsion in religious matters, while
the establishment clause insures that the government will maintain
neutrality towards religion.
FREEHOLDER originally a responsible person in favor with the King of
England who was deemed worthy of land grants in the new Colonies.
The term, now unique to New Jersey, refers to persons in elective office
comparable to county commissioners or county supervisors.
FREEHOLD [ESTATE] an estate in fee or a life estate; an estate or
interest in real property for life or of uncertain duration.
FREE ON BOARD [FOB] a commercial term that signifies a contractual
agreement between a buyer and a seller to have the subject of a sale
delivered to a designated place, usually either the “place of shipment”
or the “place of destination,” without expense to the buyer. Thus a
shipment “fob shipping point” requires the seller to bear the expense
and the risk of putting the subject of the sale into the possession of the
carrier, but the duty to pay the transportation charges from the fob point
is on the buyer. Where the shipment is “fob destination point,” the seller
is required to bear the transportation charges and the risk of transport
until the buyer point of destination. Compare free alongside [fas].
FREIGHT FORWARDER a shipper who accepts small shipments,
consolidates them into larger shipments, and takes responsibility for
their safe arrival at their point of destination.
FRESH PURSUIT in criminal law, the common law right of a police
officer to cross jurisdictional lines in order to arrest a felon. The term
also refers to the power of a police officer to make an arrest without a
warrant when he or she is in immediate pursuit of a criminal.
FRIENDLY SUIT an action authorized by law brought by agreement
between the parties, to secure a judgment that will have a binding
effect in circumstances where a mere agreement or settlement will not;
for example, where a claim in favor of an infant or another lacking legal
capacity to enter into a binding contract can, for that reason, be settled
only through the entry of a judgment. The term also refers to a suit by
an administrator or an executor in the name of a creditor, against
himself or herself, seeking an order compelling distribution to the
creditor of a fixed share of the assets by the estate being administered.
Suits that are collusive, on the other hand, will be dismissed. Compare
declaratory judgment.
FRIEND, NEXT see next friend.
FRIEND OF THE COURT see amicus curiae.
FRINGE BENEFIT see benefit [FRINGE BENEFIT].
FRISK quick, superficial search; patting outer clothing to detect, by the
sense of touch, if a concealed weapon is being carried.
FRIVOLOUS clearly insufficient as a matter of law; presenting no
debatable question. A claim is frivolous if it is insufficient because
unsupported by the facts or because the law recognizes no remedy for
the claim.
FRONT-END LOAD PLAN a contractual agreement to buy mutual fund
shares through periodic payments, usually monthly, in which the sales
commission and other expenses, called load, are taken out of the initial
payments.
FRUCTUS INDUSTRIALES (fru*k’-tu*s ĭn-du*s-trĭ-a’-le*z) Lat.: the produce
of land resulting from manual labor, such as crops.
FRUCTUS NATURALES (fru*k’-tu*s na*-tu@-ra*’-le*z) Lat.: the produce of
land that grows naturally, such as timber.
FRUIT OF THE POISONOUS TREE DOCTRINE a rule under which
evidence that is the direct result of illegal conduct on the part of an
official is inadmissible in a criminal trial against the victim of the
conduct. The doctrine draws its name from the idea that once the tree is
poisoned (the primary evidence is illegally obtained) then the fruit of
the tree (any secondary evidence) is likewise TAINTED and may also not
be used.
EXAMPLE: The police illegally break into Atsushi’s house and obtain a
confession from him as to his drug-dealing activities. He also tells the
police where they can find more drugs that he intended to sell. The
police attempt to use the confession and the drugs to convict Atsushi.
Under the fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine, neither the confession nor
the drugs can be used against him because they are the product of an
illegal entry by the police.
FRUITS OF CRIME the results of a criminal act. See forfeiture.
FRUSTRATION (OF PURPOSE) a doctrine under which the occurrence
of unexpected events may justify one of the parties to a contract in
rescinding the contract. Such frustration (also called COMMERCIAL
FRUSTRATION) typically occurs when an implied condition of an
agreement (a circumstance without which the contract would never have
been made) does not occur or ceases to exist without fault of either
party, so that the absence of the implied condition “frustrates” one
party’s intentions in making the agreement.
EXAMPLE: Andy signs a contract with a real estate salesman to purchase a
house, with the understanding that he will be able to get a zoning
change and use part of the house for his office. Contrary to what either
party expected, the zoning change is not approved. Andy may seek to
renege on his contract to purchase the house because his purpose in
purchasing the house has been frustrated.
See impossibility.
FTC see Federal Trade Commission [FTC].
FUGITIVE FROM JUSTICE one who commits a crime within a state,
and then leaves that state without awaiting the consequences of the
crime he or she committed there; also, one who conceals himself or
herself within the state in order to avoid its process.
FULL FAITH AND CREDIT the federal constitutional requirement that
the public acts, records and judicial proceedings of one state be
respected by each of the other states. Thus, if a judgment is conclusive
in the state where it was pronounced, it is equally beyond dispute
everywhere in the courts of the United States. The judgment is entitled
to full faith and credit when the second court’s inquiry discloses that the
same questions were properly before the first court and were fully and
fairly litigated and finally decided there.
EXAMPLE: Following a long trial, a company is found negligent in
manufacturing a product that caused Ayad substantial hair loss. The
manufacturer’s assets in that state are insufficient to cover the full
amount of the judgment. Ayad can take that judgment to another state
where the manufacturer has assets, sue upon that judgment, and by
applying the full faith and credit principle, obtain another judgment and
collect whatever he is still owed.
FULL DISCLOSURE obligation to reveal details. In a commercial setting,
a merchant must disclose to the consumer all details of the consumer
transaction, including the cost of financing the purchase. Under federal
and state election laws, candidates for public office are required to fully
reveal the amount and source of specified campaign contributions.
FUND an amount of money that may be available either for general uses or
purposes or that may be dedicated to a specific use or purpose; to pay
such an amount.
FUND IN COURT an amount deposited in court because parties are
contesting title to it or so that money will be available to pay a liability
that is contingent.
GENERAL FUND a fund that is not dedicated to a specific purpose but that
may be used to pay any debt or liability.
HEDGE FUND see hedge fund.
INDEX FUND see index fund.
MUTUAL FUND see mutual fund.
SINKING FUND in finance, a bond issue under the terms of which the
issuer is obligated to repurchase a portion of the bonds each year until
all of the bonds have been repurchased, rather than to redeem all of the
bonds at the end of the term of the issue.
TRUST FUND see trust fund.
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT a right that is considered by a court to be
expressed, explicitly or implicitly, in the constitution of that state or the
United States Constitution, and which is implicit in the concept of
ordered liberty, such that neither liberty nor justice would exist if they
were sacrificed. Examples of fundamental rights include a parent’s right
to raise his or her own child without governmental intrusion, the right to
interstate travel, or the right to become a candidate for election to public
office. A court must review laws infringing upon fundamental rights
under a standard of strict scrutiny. To withstand strict scrutiny, a law
must be necessary to promote a compelling governmental interest and
must be narrowly tailored to advance that interest. Alternatively, if a
court determines the right not to be a fundamental right, the rational
basis test applies. See privacy, right of.
FUNDED DEBT see floating debt.
FUNGIBLE a term applied to goods that are interchangeable or capable of
substitution by nature or agreement. Oil, grain and coal are examples of
naturally fungible goods. When storing fungible goods, warehousemen
are exempt from the legal requirement of keeping stored goods from
one depositor separate from the goods of another. Securities of the
same issue are considered fungible; hence a person obligated to deliver
securities may deliver any security of the specified issue.
FUTURE ESTATE see estate [FUTURE ESTATE [ESTATE IN FUTURO]].
FUTURE INTEREST an interest in presently existing real property or
personal property, or in a gift or trust, that will commence in use,
possession, or enjoyment in the future. A legatee to receive an annual
income upon reaching the age of 21 has a future interest that, when that
age is reached, will ripen into a present interest. Future interests may
constitute either vested or contingent estates.
EXAMPLE: A father conveys 200 shares of stock to Shira, his daughter,
but if Shira dies before the father, the stock goes to Marcy. Marcy has a
future interest in the stock that is contingent on Shira’s predeceasing the
father. If Shira does predecease the father, Marcy’s future interest then
vests.
FUTURES agreements whereby one person agrees to sell a commodity at a
certain time in the future for a certain price. The buyer agrees to pay
that price, knowing that the person has nothing to deliver at the time,
but with the understanding that when the time arrives for delivery the
buyer is to pay him or her the difference between the market value of
that commodity and the price agreed upon if the commodity’s value
declines; and if it advances, the seller is to pay to the buyer the
difference between the agreed-upon price and the market price. Thus, if
the price of the commodity rises, the buyer makes a profit, and if the
price declines, the buyer suffers a loss.
G
GAG ORDER a court-imposed order to restrict information or comment
about a case. The ostensible purpose of such an order is to protect the
interests of all parties and preserve the right to a fair trial by curbing
publicity likely to prejudice a jury. A gag order cannot be directly
imposed on members of the press because this constitutes an
impermissible prior restraint and violates the First Amendment.
GAIN see recognition [NONRECOGNITION OF GAIN; RECOGNITION OF GAIN].
GAINFUL EMPLOYMENT [OCCUPATION] employment suited to the
ability of the one employed. For purposes of disability covered by
insurance, it may mean the ordinary employment of the insured, or other
employment approximating the same livelihood as the insured might be
expected to follow in view of his or her circumstances and physical and
mental capabilities.
GAIN OR LOSS REALIZED see realization [GAIN OR LOSS REALIZED].
GAINS OR LOSSES see capital [CAPITAL GAINS OR LOSSES].
GAMBLING a play for value against an uncertain event in the hope of
gaining something for value. Includes the payment of a price for a
chance to gain a prize. Gambling is illegal in most jurisdictions,
although may states permit state-run lotteries or casinos. See aleatory
[ALEATORY CONTRACT].
GAME LAWS laws whose general aim is to protect from unauthorized
pursuit and killing certain birds and animals. These laws may include
outright prohibitions, or may restrict the hunting seasons, classes of
animals, or type of weapons used.
GAOL the British and early-American spelling of “jail.”
GARAGEMAN’S LIEN see lien [MECHANIC’S LIEN].
GARNISH to bring a garnishment proceeding or to attach wages or other
property pursuant to such a proceeding.
EXAMPLE: Charles owes money to a department store for several
appliances that he purchased on credit. Once Charles stopped paying,
the store brought a garnishment proceeding against him for the money
owed. If the court agrees with the store, it will order that a part of
Charles’ wages go directly to the store and not to Charles.
GARNISHEE a person who receives notice to retain, until he or she
receives further notice from the court, custody of assets in his or her
control that are owed to or belong to another person. The garnishee
merely holds the assets until legal proceedings determine who is
entitled to the property. The term thus signifies one on whom process of
garnishment is served. In a statutory garnishment proceeding, the
garnishee (often an employer) may be directed to pay over to the
creditor a portion of the debtor’s property (such as an employee’s
wages) that is in the garnishee’s possession.
GARNISHMENT process in which money or goods in the hands of a third
person, which are due a defendant, are attached by the plaintiff. It is a
statutory remedy that consists of notifying a third party to retain
something he or she has that belongs to the defendant (debtor), to make
disclosure to the court concerning it, and to dispose of it as the court
shall direct.
GATT General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. See tariff.
GAVELKIND at common law, a form of feudal land ownership that
required land to descend to all sons equally. By the end of the first
quarter of the twentieth century all land ownership, or tenure, was
reduced to a single form of common socage and peculiar customary
tenures such as gavelkind were abolished.
By distributing land to all sons equally, gavelkind tenure differred
from the English doctrine of primogeniture that allowed only the oldest
son to inherit. In the United States, statutes of descent and
distribution in each state govern intestate succession. These statues
generally provide that all children share equally. See primogeniture
and descent and distribution.
GBMI guilty but mentally ill. See insanity.
GENERAL APPEARANCE see appearance [GENERAL APPEARANCE].
GENERAL ASSUMPSIT see assumpsit [GENERAL ASSUMPSIT].
GENERAL CHALLENGE see challenge [GENERAL CHALLENGE].
GENERAL CONTRACTOR see contractor [GENERAL CONTRACTOR].
GENERAL COURT-MARTIAL see court-martial; military law
[COURT-MARTIAL].
GENERAL DAMAGES see damages [ACTUAL [COMPENSATORY;
GENERAL] DAMAGES].
GENERAL DEMURRER see demurrer [GENERAL DEMURRER].
GENERAL DENIAL see denial [GENERAL DENIAL].
GENERAL FUND see fund [GENERAL FUND].
GENERAL INTENT see intent [GENERAL INTENT].
GENERAL MENS REA see mens rea [GENERAL MENS REA].
GENERAL PARTNER see partnership [GENERAL PARTNER].
GENERAL POWER OF APPOINTMENT see power of appointment
[GENERAL POWER OF APPOINTMENT].
GENERAL WARRANT see search warrant [GENERAL WARRANTS].
GENERAL WARRANTY DEED see warranty deed [GENERAL
WARRANTY DEED].
GENERATION SKIPPING TRANSFER a generation skipping transfer
is one more than a single generation removed from the transferor; e.g., a
transfer by a grandfather to a grandchild. A GENERATION SKIPPING
TRUST is created to make a generation skipping transfer. Certain
generation skipping transfers made by a generation skipping trust or its
equivalent are subject to a generation skipping transfer tax. If the
transfer is not by a trust but directly by the donor, such transfer is
subject to tax [UNIFIED ESTATE AND GIFT TAX], regardless of whether it
skips a generation.
GENERIC general, relating to a group or class of related things; something
not specific, not referring to a particular thing. The term “generic” has
reference to a class of related things while the term “specific” is limited
to a particular, definite, or precise thing.
GENERIC DRUG LAW refers to modern statutes enacted by many states
that permit or require pharmacists in certain circumstances to substitute
a drug product with the same active ingredients and of the same generic
type for the drug prescribed by the physician.
GENEVA CONVENTIONS a set of treaties and protocols that apply
during periods of armed conflict and which set forth the expectations
under international law for humanitarian treatment of prisoners of war,
those wounded in war, war zone civilians, and medical and religious
personnel. Compare enemy combatant.
GEOGRAPHIC MARKET EXTENSION MERGER see merger
[GEOGRAPHIC MARKET EXTENSION MERGER].
GERRYMANDER to create a civil division of an unusual shape within a
particular locale for improper purpose; to redistrict a state, creating
unnatural boundaries and isolating members of a particular political
party, in the hope that a maximum number of the elected representatives
will be of that political party.
EXAMPLE: A political party finally wins control of a state legislature. At
the same time, the legislative districts must be restructured to account
for population shifts. The party in power uses the opportunity to insure
future control of the legislature by gerrymandering the districts. The
end result is to create unnatural boundaries that will give the party the
least opposition for future elections. The object of gerrymandering is to
create districts in which the controlling party maintains a majority
among registered voters.
GIFT a voluntary transfer of property made without consideration, that is,
for which no value is received in return, which is accepted by the
recipient. In federal tax law, a gift is excluded from the gross income of
the recipient, but the transferor may be subject to the unified estate and
gift tax. See tax [UNIFIED ESTATE AND GIFT TAX].
CLASS GIFT see class gift.
GIFT CAUSA MORTIS see gift causa mortis.
GIFT IN CONTEMPLATION OF DEATH former provisions of federal tax law
provided that transfers made within three years of a donor’s death were
deemed to have been made in contemplation of death and thus
includible in his or her gross estate “unless shown to the contrary.” The
three-year rule has been continued but without reference to
contemplation of death and with certain other exclusions.
GIFT INTER VIVOS see inter vivos.
SPLIT GIFT a transfer in which the person receiving the property makes a
payment that is less than the value of the property transferred.
GIFT CAUSA MORTIS a gift of personal property made in contemplation
of impending death; delivery of the property must be made and death
must occur as expected; otherwise, the gift is void.
GIFT IN CONTEMPLATION OF DEATH any gift made by a person within
three years of death. Such transfers (except if less than $3,000) are
subject to the unified estate and gift tax as if they had occurred at death.
GIFT OVER an estate that is to follow upon the expiration of a preceding
estate.
GIFT TAX a tax that is imposed on transfers of property by gift during the
transferor’s lifetime. While the federal government imposes a gift tax
most states do not. The federal gift tax is imposed at the same rates as
the federal estate tax.
GINNIE MAE see mortgage market [GINNIE MAE].
GNP see Gross National Product [GNP].
GOING CONCERN VALUE the additional element of value of a trade or
business that attaches to property by reason of its existence as an
integral part of a going concern. Going concern value includes the value
that is attributable to the interruption notwithstanding a change in
ownership. Going concern value also includes the value that is
attributable to the use or availability of an acquired trade or business
(for example, the net earnings that otherwise would not be received
during any period were the acquired trade or business not available or
operational. Good will is the value of a trade or business that is
attributable to the expectancy of continued customer patronage, whether
due to the name of a trade or business, the reputation of a trade or
business, or any other factor. The pre-1993 Act law rule barring
amortization for good will and going concern value has produced an
enormous amount of litigation. The IRS has generally taken the position
that any amount paid for intangibles in the acquisition of a business
relates to nonamortizable good will or going concern value, while the
taxpayer has attempted to show that amortizable intangibles such as
customer lists have a value apart from good will or going concern value
and a limited useful life. Currently the code eliminates this IRStaxpayer conflict by providing that good will and going concern value
are amortizable over the same 15-year period applicable to other
intangibles. Self-created good will and going concern value generally
are not subject to 15-year amortization.
GOLDEN PARACHUTE a financial package with extremely generous
terms received by an executive who loses his or her job or resigns due
to a corporate merger or takeover.
GOOD CAUSE substantial or legally sufficient reason for doing
something. For example, if a statute provides for granting a new trial
upon a showing of good cause, such good cause might include the
existence of fraud, lack of notice to the parties or newly discovered
evidence.
EXAMPLE: Motions submitted before a judge, which in essence ask the
judge to do something, must be supported by a showing of good cause.
On a motion to exclude or suppress evidence for trial, good cause must
be shown by example of illegal police conduct in the seizing of the
evidence. For the motion to be granted, the judge must be convinced the
conduct occurred and is enough to justify exclusion.
GOOD FAITH total absence of intention to seek unfair advantage or to
defraud another party; an honest intention to fulfill one’s obligations;
observance of reasonable standards of fair dealing.
EXAMPLE: Dion purchases securities for 60 percent of their face value
from an associate. The associate had obtained the securities
fraudulently, and the real owner then sued Dion for their return. Dion is
protected from the owner’s claims if he acted in good faith and is thus a
bona fide purchaser. The owner states that Dion could not have acted
in good faith since he purchased them at such a low cost in comparison
with their face value. But that fact alone does not preclude Dion’s good
faith defense, since the low price can be justified by the associate’s dire
need for quick cash.
In property law, a good faith purchaser of land pays value for the land
and has no knowledge or notice of any facts that would cause an
ordinary, prudent person to make inquiry concerning the validity of the
conveyance.
GOODS any species of property that is not real estate, CHOSE IN ACTION
(see chose), investment securities or the like.
GOOD SAMARITAN one who renders voluntary aid without
compensation to a person who is injured or in danger. There is no
requirement to intervene; however, if one chooses to be a Good
Samaritan, one may face liability if reasonable care is not exercised
and the rescued party is further injured. Various state statutes may
provide limited levels of immunity from lawsuits for the rescuer.
GOOD TENANTABLE REPAIR as used in a lease, describes the
obligation of a tenant to maintain the condition of property that has been
rented.
GOOD TITLE a clear title free from present litigation, obvious defects
and grave doubts concerning its validity or mechantability; a title valid
in fact that is marketable to a reasonable purchaser or mortgaged as
security for a loan of money to a person of reasonable prudence. In a
contract to convey good title, the term also signifies that there are no
encumbrances on the land. See also recording acts; warranty.
GOOD UNTIL CANCELLED see order [GOOD UNTIL CANCELLED].
GOOD WILL [GOODWILL] an intangible but recognized business asset
that is the result of such features of an ongoing enterprise as the
production or sale of reputable brand-name products, a good
relationship with customers and suppliers, and the standing of the
business in its community. Good will can become a balance sheet asset
when a going business is acquired at a price exceeding the net asset
value (assets less liabilities).
GOVERNMENT the exercise of authority in the administration of the
affairs of a state, community, or society; an instrument to preserve an
ordered society; the authoritative direction and restraint exercised over
the actions of men and women.
In the United States, the federal and state governments operate under
a written constitution from which their sovereignty and authority
emanate.
GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS activity done or furnished for general
public good; legal duties imposed by a state upon its citizens that it may
not omit with impunity, but must perform at its peril.
When a jurisdiction engages in a governmental function, such as
operating a police department, conducting safety inspections, suing to
enforce pubic policy as manifested by city ordinances, or generally is
not acting in a proprietary manner, it is immune from tort liability for its
actions unless a lawsuit is specifically permitted by statute. See
sovereign immunity.
GOVERNMENTAL IMMUNITY the common law doctrine that the
government, be it federal, state, or local, is not amenable to suit unless
it consents to be sued. See federal tort claims act; sovereign
immunity.
GOVERNMENT, MILITARY see military law [MILITARY
GOVERNMENT].
GRACE PERIOD in general, any period specified in a contract during
which payment is permitted, without penalty, beyond the due date of the
debt. In the insurance context, it is a span of time after an insurance
policy premium was due to be paid, during which the insurance
nevertheless remains in force.
GRADED OFFENSE one where an offender is subject to different
penalties for various degrees of the offense, according to terms of a
statute. Modern criminal codes rely upon degrees of an offense to vary
sanctions according to the level of harm to others caused or risked by
the actor. See degree of crime.
GRAFT fraudulent obtaining of public money by the corruption of public
officials; a dishonest advantage that one person by reason of his or her
position, influence or trust acquires from another. See bribery.
GRANDFATHER CLAUSE a provision permitting persons engaged in an
activity before passage of a law affecting that activity to receive a
license or prerogative without the necessity of fulfilling all that is
legally required of persons subsequently undertaking the same activity.
EXAMPLE: Felix has been selling hot dogs on the street for 15 years. The
town council then decides to require licenses for all street vendors.
Because the measure includes a grandfather clause, Felix can continue
selling his food without a license.
GRAND JURY see jury [GRAND JURY].
GRAND LARCENY see larceny [GRAND LARCENY].
GRANT to give, allow or transfer something to another, with or without
compensation; especially, a gift of land made by one having authority
over it. The one giving the gift or making the transfer is the GRANTOR.
The recipient is theGRANTEE. Compare convey. Also, generally, to yield
or concede, as in to grant a request.
LAND GRANT a governmental grant to another level of government, a
corporation, or an individual, without compensation. Many of the first
colleges in the United States were established as land-grant colleges,
with the land being donated to the schools by federal or state
governments.
GRANTEE see grant [GRANTEE].
GRANTOR see assignor; grant [GRANTOR].
GRANTOR-GRANTEE INDEX see chain of title.
GRATIS free; given or performed without reward or consideration.
GRATUITOUS BAILMENT see bailment [GRATUITOUS BAILMENT].
GRATUITOUS PROMISE one by which a person promises to do, or
refrain from doing, something without requiring consideration in
return.
GRATUITY see gift.
GRAVAMEN the essence of a complaint, charge, cause of action, etc.
EXAMPLE: A complaint if filed against Bruno alleging that he seriously
hurt someone in a barroom brawl and then fled the scene. The gravamen
of the complaint is that Bruno seriously hurt someone.
GRAVITAS seriousness or weightiness in conduct or speech.
GREAT CARE see care [GREAT CARE].
GREAT CHARTER see Magna Carta [Magna Charta].
GREAT WRIT see habeas corpus.
GREEN AUDIT an evaluation of a business’ operations with a focus on
finding ways to operate more efficiently and with environmentally
responsible methods, including renewable power sources, such as
hydroelectric, wind, solar, and geothermal energy.
GREEN CARD a common name for the alien registration card carried by
permanent resident aliens in the United States. Permanent resident
status is a first step towards becoming a naturalized citizen.
GREEN GOODS money which is counterfeit.
GRIEVANCE one’s allegation that something imposes an illegal burden, or
denies some equitable or legal right, or causes injustice. An employee
may be entitled by a collective bargaining agreement to seek relief
through a GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
GROSS conduct that is willful and flagrant, out of all measure, beyond
allowance, not to be excused, as in gross negligence.
Consideration, profit, or income before charges and deduction as in
gross income. Compare net income. See easement [EASEMENT IN
GROSS].
GROSS ESTATE see net estate [GROSS ESTATE].
GROSS INCOME see income [GROSS INCOME].
GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT [GNP] the total money measure of a
nation’s annual production of goods and services. GNP is defined both
in terms of factor consumption (goods and services purchased by
private citizens and government, gross private investment, and the net
foreign trade-investment balance), and in terms of factor earnings
(wages, taxes, rents, interest and profits, and depreciation). GNP is a
gross production measure since no allowance is made for capital
consumption; i.e., depreciation is part of GNP. Since economists
consider GNP to be one of the most important concepts in economic
science, the United States and other national governments expend
considerable effort in collecting, analyzing, and publishing GNP
statistics. Results are reported in both current dollars, including
inflation, and constant dollars.
GROSS NEGLIGENCE see negligence [GROSS NEGLIGENCE].
GROUND RENT an estate of inheritance in the rent of lands, i.e., an
inheritable interest in and right to the rent collected through the leasing
of certain lands. It is a freehold estate, and as such is subject to
encumbrance by mortgage or judgment (lien, attachment, etc.). The
ground rent is an interest distinct from that held by the owner of the
property, whose estate is in the land itself. The term most frequently
signifies the long-term rent paid on land upon which office buildings,
hotels, and other structures are built, where the owner of the land retains
title.
GROWTH STOCK the stock of a company that has achieved aboveaverage earnings growth in the past and has good prospects for
continued increases in the future.
GTC see order [GTC].
GUARANTEE l. to agree or promise to be responsible for the debt,
default or miscarriage of another; 2. a promise or contract to answer for
the debt, default or miscarriage of another; 3. one who receives a
guaranty. Compare save harmless.
GUARANTEE CLAUSE Article IV, Section 4 of the United States
Constitution, which states that “the United States shall guarantee to
every state in this Union a republican form of government.”
GUARANTEED SECURITY a bond or stock that is guaranteed as to
principal or interest or both by someone other than the issuer.
GUARANTOR one who makes a guaranty.
GUARANTY l. a promise to be responsible for the debt, default or
miscarriage of another; 2. a warranty or promise to undertake an
original obligation; 3. something given as security for the performance
of an act or the continued quality of a thing. See surety.
GUARDIAN one who legally has care and management of the person or
estate, or both, of an incompetent; an officer or agent of the court who
is appointed to protect the interests of minors or incompetent persons
and to provide for their welfare, education, and support. See also
committee; next friend; ward.
GUARDIAN AD LITEM a person appointed by the court to protect the
interests of a ward in a legal proceeding. Compare next friend.
GUEST l. a transient who rents a room at a hotel; 2. someone to whom
hospitality is extended without charge.
An AUTOMOBILE GUEST is one who rides in an automobile for his or
her own benefit without giving the driver compensation for the ride;
designated by the law as such for purposes of determining liability of
the owner or driver of the automobile. See guest statute.
For purposes of tort law, a SOCIAL GUEST is considered a licensee
with respect to his or her entry upon the host’s premises, so that no duty
of affirmative care or inspection of the premises for defects is owed to
him or her.
EXAMPLE: After a late night of drinking, the host invited Stefan to spend
the night at his house. As Stefan was getting into bed, the wooden frame
cracked and injured Stefan’s foot. Stefan has no cause of action against
the host since Stefan was only a guest and not a paying customer.
GUEST STATUTE a law that provides that a lesser standard of care is
owed by an automobile owner or driver toward his or her nonpaying
passenger [guest]. These statutes differ from state to state, but all
require more than ordinary negligence on the part of an owner or driver
for an automobile guest to recover damages in a civil suit.
GUILD see National Lawyers Guild.
GUILTY the condition of having been found by a jury to have committed
the crime charged, or some lesser-included offense. The term may,
though rarely does, refer to the commission of a civil wrong or tort.
Compare conviction.
GUN CONTROL LAW a law restricting or regulating the sale, purchase
or possession of firearms, or establishing a system of licensing,
registration or identification of firearms or their owners or users.
H
HABEAS CORPUS (ha@’-be@-u*s kôr’-pu*s) Lat.: you have the body. The
writ of habeas corpus, known as the GREAT WRIT, has varied use in
criminal and civil contexts. It is a procedure for obtaining a judicial
determination of the legality of an individual’s custody. Technically, it is
used in the criminal law context to bring the petitioner before the court
to inquire into the legality of his confinement. The writ of federal
habeas corpus is used to test the constitutionality of a state criminal
conviction.
EXAMPLE: Luke believes that his conviction in the trial court was
obtained unconstitutionally in that he was not provided counsel until
three days before his trial. He raised the issue on appeal in the state
court system but was denied a new trial. Having exhausted all state
remedies, Luke files a writ of habeas corpus in the federal district court,
alleging that his conviction and present confinement violate his Sixth
Amendment right to counsel.
The writ is used in the civil context to challenge the validity of child
custody and deportations.
HABENDUM that clause of the deed that names the grantee and defines
the estate to be granted. It begins with the words “to have and to hold. .
. .”
HABITABILITY the condition of residental or other premises being
reasonably fit for occupation, and that does not impair the health, safety,
or well-being of the occupants. If this condition is not met, due to a
failure to provide heat, for example, the occupant may be eligible for a
rent abatement or may under some circumstances vacate the premises.
See eviction [CONSTRUCTIVE EVICTION]; warranty [WARRANTY OF
HABITABILITY].
HABITUAL OFFENDER see criminal [HABITUAL OFFENDER]; sentence
[EXTENDED TERM]; three strikes [SENTENCE ENHANCEMENT].
HACK accessing a computer program or network without authorization,
often for the purposes of altering the program by way of a virus. Some
programmers [hackers] seek to find weak points in a security system
simply to prove that it can be breached.
HAEC VERBA see in haec verba.
HAGUE CONVENTIONS see neutrality laws.
HAIRCUT the difference between the market value of a security (used as
collateral for a loan) and the amount the lender will provide for it.
HALFWAY HOUSE a residence established to assist persons who have
left highly structured institutions to adjust to and reenter society and live
within its accepted norms. Mental patients and prisoners may be
released to facilities of this kind located within the community and
usually with no security other than supervised regimen of sign-in, signout, and curfew rules. Release to halfway houses is sometimes a first
step in a parole program. Modern statutes permit courts to sentence
defendants directly to such facilities, known as RESIDENTIAL
COMMUNITY TREATMENT CENTERS as a condition of probation.
A work-release program may utilize a halfway house instead of a
more secure institution for nighttime confinement and week-end
supervision. The halfway house provides a supervised and restricted
environment in which to ascertain the convict’s ability to form a
productive life in society while simultaneously fulfilling the functions
of a penal institution in its concern for security and rehabilitation.
Although states are not required to utilize such modern correctional
concepts as halfway houses, if they choose to do so, the procedures for
assigning inmates to such facilities must meet standards of procedural
due process and equal protection of the laws.
HALLUCINATION a state of mind whereby a person senses something
that in reality does not exist; a perception of an object having no reality.
Any of the senses may be involved, although sight or hearing are most
commonly affected. The state of hallucination most often results from
mental illness or from ingesting drugs designed to create these
perceptions. See controlled substance [HALLUCINOGENS].
HALLUCINOGENS see controlled substances [HALLUCINOGENS].
HANGED, DRAWN, AND QUARTERED a common law punishment for
convictions of high treason or other atrocious crimes where the
defendant was drawn to the place of execution, disemboweled alive, and
then beheaded and quartered. See cruel and unusual punishment.
HARASSMENT 1. a prosecution brought without reasonable expectation
of obtaining a valid conviction; 2. unnecessarily oppressive exercise of
authority; 3. conduct motivated by a malicious or discriminatory
purpose.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT refers to any policy or practice pursuant to which
employees are subject to physical or verbal harassment by their
superiors or are denied employment or promotion on the basis of their
gender.
HARD CASES cases that produce decisions deviating from the true
principles of law in order to meet the exigencies presented by the
extreme hardship of one party.
It is sometimes said that “hard cases make bad law” because logic is
often shortcut in a hard case, and later attempts to justify the new law
thus created often compound the original inadequacy of reasoning.
HARD COPY physical document; a printout of a stored document (such as
microfilm or computer data). Compare soft copy (an electronic file).
HARDSHIP, UNNECESSARY see unnecessary hardship.
HARM see injury; irreparable injury [damage; harm].
HARMLESS ERROR error that is not sufficiently prejudicial to the
losing party in a lawsuit to warrant the appellate court’s modifying the
lower court’s decision. A conclusion that an error is harmless reflects
the reviewing court’s determination that the lower court’s decision
would have been the same with or without the purported error. Compare
plain error.
EXAMPLE: The confessions of two codefendants are improperly
introduced at Vic’s trial. An appellate court may find that the violation
was merely harmless error and does not require a new trial for Vic if the
confessions had little or no effect upon the jury’s determination of Vic’s
guilt.
HATE CRIME see bias crime.
HEADNOTE summary, placed at the beginning of a case report, of points
discussed and issues decided in a case.
HEAD OF HOUSEHOLD an unmarried taxpayer who maintains as his or
her home a household that is the principal residence of a designated
dependent. A qualified head of household is subject to a lower tax rate
than that applied to a person not a head of household.
HEALTHCARE REFORM see affordable care act.
HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY AND ACCOUNT-ABILITY
ACT [HIPAA] see affordable care act [HEALTH INSURANCE
PORTABILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT [HIPAA]].
HEARING a proceeding where evidence is taken to determine an issue of
fact and to reach a decision on the basis of that evidence; describes
whatever takes place before magistrates sitting without jury. Thus a
hearing, such as an ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING, may take place outside
the judicial process, before officials who have been granted judicial
authority expressly for the purpose of conducting such hearings.
FINAL HEARING is sometimes used to describe that stage of
proceedings relating to the determination of a suit upon its merits, as
distinguished from those of preliminary questions. See also fair
hearing.
HEARING DE NOVO see de novo [DE NOVO HEARING].
HEARSAY RULE a rule that declares not admissible as evidence any
statement other than that by a witness while testifying at the hearing
and offered into evidence to prove the truth of the matter stated. The
hearsay statement may be oral or written and includes nonverbal
conduct intended as a substitute for words (such as a nodding of the
head). If, for example, a witness’ statement as to what he or she heard
another person say is elicited to prove the truth of what that other person
said, it is hearsay. If, however, it is elicited to merely show that the
words were spoken, it is not hearsay. The witness’ answer will be
admissible only to show that the other person spoke certain words and
not to show the truth of what the other person said. The reason for the
hearsay rule is that the credibility of the witness is the key ingredient in
weighing the truth of his or her statement; so when that statement is
made out of court, without benefit of cross-examination and without the
witness’ demeanor being subject to assessment by the trier of fact
(judge or jury), there is generally no adequate basis for determining
whether the out-of-court statement is true.
EXAMPLE: Defendant Doug is on trial for robbing Victim Vinnie. Witness
Walt wants to testify that Bartender Bart told Walt that Doug had
admitted to Bart the commission of the robbery. Walt’s testimony would
be hearsay if it were offered to prove the truth of the matter (Doug
confessed) since Doug did not tell Walt. (Note, however, that if Bart
himself were to testify it would not be hearsay since he heard the
confession and may be cross-examined about the circumstances). If
Walt’s testimony were offered for a purpose other than the truth of the
confession (such as to establish that Bart was an extremely close friend
of Doug and that Doug confided in Bart his closest secrets), some courts
would allow the testimony.
Hearsay is prohibited due to the constitutional guarantee of
confrontation (see confrontation clause); however, there are many
exceptions to the hearsay rule of exclusion based on a combination of
trustworthiness and necessity. Thus, official written statements, such as
payroll records, where the declarant’s statements are based on firsthand
knowledge and where the officer is under an official duty to make the
report (and hence has no motive to falsify) are admissible under the
BUSINESS RECORDS EXCEPTION. Another common exception is made for
DYING DECLARATIONS. Under this rule a statement made by a person
with knowledge or hopeless expectation of his or her impending death is
admissible through another who overheard that statement where the
declarant is unavailable because he or she died. Originally it was
strongly believed that a dying person would tell the truth; thus the
witness’ testimony as to what the dying declarant said became
admissible both on the grounds of trustworthiness and necessity. Today,
with more skepticism about the effect of religiosity of truth-telling,
necessity remains as a major factor in determining admissibility. The
question of the witness’ credibility is subject to demeanor examination
and cross-examination for bias, memory, etc. Some jurisdictions permit
any admission by a party to be offered by his or her adversary in a civil
proceeding through any competent witness as another broad exception
to the hearsay rule. See and compare admission by a party-opponent;
declaration against interest; evidence.
STATE OF MIND EXCEPTION admits an out-of-court declaration of an
existing motive, even if the declarant is unable to testify.
HEART-BALM STATUTE legislation that abolishes causes of action for
alienation of affections, breach of promise to marry, criminal
conversation, or seduction.
HEAT OF PASSION see manslaughter [HEAT OF PASSION].
HEDGE FUND an investment partnership or mutual fund that uses
selling short to hedge long positions in stocks. If stock selection is
correct, the stocks sold short decline more in a falling market than the
stock owned, and the stocks owned appreciate more in a rising market
than the stocks sold short. The goal is to generate trading and
investment profits no matter what the direction of the general market.
Hedge funds may borrow money to increase their leverage.
HEDGING 1. taking measures to counterbalance possible loss. 2. a
securities transaction that reduces or limits the risk in investments by
taking positions that tend to offset each other. For example, a business
can offset the risk of an asset declining by agreeing to sell a specified
amount of the asset at a set price at some predetermined point in the
future. A potato chip manufacturer can hedge or protect his or her profit
margin on a large order of chips to be delivered in the future by buying
potatoes in the futures market; a potato farmer may sell the futures
contract to the process to protect some or all of the investment in raising
his or her crop. A speculator in potato contracts might hedge a long
position in old crop futures by selling new crop futures in anticipation
of a bumper crop and, therefore, lower prices. Arbitrage is a type of
hedge involving the buying of securities in one market and selling in
another market when the price difference between markets offers a
profitable trade. Hedged trades are used in the stock option market
where the various positions are referred to as spreads, straddles, etc. In
securities trading and investment, selling short is used to hedge stock
ownership positions against a decline in the general market. See hedge
fund.
HEIR APPARENT one who has the rights to inheritance provided that he
or she lives longer than the donor ancestor. An antilapse statute may
operate to save a gift to the estate of an heir apparent who predeceases
the testator.
HEIRS strictly, those whom statutory law would appoint to inherit an
estate should the ancestor die without a will [intestate]; sometimes
referred to as HEIRS AT LAW, RIGHTFUL HEIRS, LEGAL HEIRS. The term is
often applied indiscriminately to those who inherit by will or deed, as
well as by operation of law.
AND HIS HEIRS in common law, these words had to be included in order
to convey a fee simple absolute. The formal requirement has been
abolished or modified by statute in most of the states, and now one may
convey or devise an absolute interest in real property without using
these technical words.
COLLATERAL HEIR an heir who is not of the direct line of the deceased,
but comes from a collateral line, as a brother, sister, an aunt or uncle,
nephew, niece, or a cousin of the deceased.
HEIRS AND ASSIGNS words describing that a fee simple estate is being
conveyed; words of limitation, not of substitution, or of purchase. When
used in a will, the words are descriptive and do not set up an
independent class of legatees.
LINEAL HEIR one who inherits in a line either ascending or descending
from a common source as distinguished from a collateral heir.
HEIRS OF THE BODY issue of the body, offspring engendered by the
person named as parent. These words are used in instruments of
conveyance, such as deeds and wills, to create a conditional fee or a fee
tail.
HELOC see home equity line of credit [HELOC].
HEREDITAMENTS anything that can be inherited, including real
property or personal property. CORPOREAL HEREDITAMENTS generally
are tangible property. INCORPOREAL HEREDITAMENTS are less tangible
rights connected to land, such as an easement or right to rent.
HEREDITARY SUCCESSION the passing of title according to the laws
of descent, acquisition of title to an estate by a person by operation of
law upon the death of an ancestor who has not left a valid will affecting
the property inherited. See descent and distribution.
HIDDEN ASSET a property value that is understated on the balance sheet
of a company because of accounting convention and/or deliberate action
of management.
EXAMPLE: Cubbie Corporation is fearful of being taken over by a large
international company and thereby losing its independence. To prevent
the takeover, it undervalues the worth of its real estate holdings to make
Cubbie look as though the corporation were not worth buying. The real
estate holdings constitute hidden assets.
HIDDEN DEFECT defect not recognizable upon a reasonable inspection
of a good or product, or that is not readily apparent, for which a seller is
generally liable and that would give rise to a right to revoke a prior
acceptance. See latent defect. Compare patent defect. See as is.
HIDDEN INFLATION a price increase implemented by offering a smaller
quantity or poorer quality for the old price.
HIDDEN TAX an indirect tax paid unwittingly by the consumer, such as
taxes levied on goods at some point in their production or transport
prior to retail sale.
HIJACKING the commandeering or seizure of a mode of transportation
such as an airplane, truck, or train by force or threat of force for illegal
purposes. Such purposes may include theft of the cargo or other
contents; redirection of the destination to suit the hijacker’s specific
purposes; or kidnapping or hostage taking for monetary or political
demands. Also known as piracy, such acts are governed by
international agreements regarding jurisdiction over hijackers and
extradition.
CARJACKING similar in that a motor vehicle such as a car or van is taken
from the occupant by force. The driver or other passengers may be
forced to remain in the vehicle while it is driven or may be forced out of
the vehicle. Carjacking is distinguished from car theft by the presence
of occupants.
HIPAA
HIPAA see affordable care act [HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY AND
ACCOUNTABILITY ACT [HIPAA]].
HIT-AND-RUN STATUTES statutes requiring that a motorist involved in
an accident stop and identify himself or herself and give certain
information about himself or herself to the other motorist and to the
police. These laws have been upheld as not violative of the privilege
against self-incrimination on the ground that they call for neutral acts,
not intended to be probative of guilt, and pose only an insignificant
hazard of self-incrimination.
HLA DQ ALPHA see DNA testing [HLA DQ ALPHA].
HOARDING excess accumulation of commodities or currency in
anticipation of scarcity and/or higher prices.
HOBBY LOSS a loss incurred by a taxpayer in an activity not pursued for
profit. In general, hobby losses are deductible only to the extent of
income generated by the hobby.
HOLDER a person in possession of a document of title or an instrument
or an investment security drawn, issued or indorsed to the holder or to
his or her order or to bearer or in blank.
HOLDER IN DUE COURSE a good faith holder who has taken a
negotiable instrument for value, without notice that it was overdue or
had been dishonored or that there was any defense against or claim to
it. In property law, the innocent buyer or holder in due course is referred
to as a bona fide purchaser.
EXAMPLE: People’s Finance Company regularly buys promissory notes
from stores that require the customers to sign these notes in return for
merchandise. People’s is a holder in due course of these notes since it
has given value for them. That status protects People’s from almost all
claims against the notes.
HOLD HARMLESS the assumption by one party to an agreement to
relieve the other party of any liability that might attend the situation
governed by the agreement. See save harmless.
HOLDING 1. in commercial and property law, property to which one has
legal title and of which one is in possession. The term may be used to
refer specifically to ownership of stocks or shares of corporations. 2.
in procedure, any ruling of the court, including rulings upon the
admissibility of evidence or other questions presented during trial.
Compare dictum.
HOLDING CELL see jail [HOLDING CELL].
HOLDING COMPANY 1. a corporation organized to hold the stock of
other corporations; 2. any company, incorporated or unincorporated,
that is in a position to control or materially influence the management of
one or more other companies by virtue, in part at least, of its ownership
of securities in the other company or companies.
HOLDING PERIOD the period during which property must be held
before its disposition will give rise to long-term capital gain or loss.
HOLDOVER TENANCY see tenancy [TENANCY AT SUFFERANCE].
HOLDUP SUIT a lawsuit that has no legal basis and is instituted solely to
prevent or block something from occurring. A party harmed by such a
suit may have an action for malicious prosecution. See also strike suit.
HOLOGRAPHIC WILL a will entirely written, dated, and signed by the
testator’s own hand. The word is sometimes written OLOGRAPHIC. In
some states, such a will need not be witnessed and is valid, under a
statute of descent and distribution, to pass property. In other states,
such a will is invalid.
HOMAGE during the feudal period, the ceremony wherein the vassal knelt
before the lord, acknowledged himself to be his man, and swore fealty
[an oath of loyalty to the lord]. It was frequently accompanied by a
grant of land from the lord to the vassal, the land to be held of the lord
by the vassal as tenant. As a consequence, any attempt by the vassal [or
tenant] to convey more than the estate that had been granted him (e.g.,
an attempt by the vassal to convey a fee simple when his grant from the
lord consisted only of a life estate), was not only tortious conduct with
regard to the lord, but was also treasonous. See fealty.
HOME EQUITY CONVERSION MORTGAGE see mortgage
[REVERSE MORTGAGE].
HOME EQUITY LINE OF CREDIT [HELOC] line of credit secured by
the equity in the home above the debt outstanding in the mortgage. See
credit [LINE OF CREDIT]; loan. Compare mortgage.
HOMELAND SECURITY see Department of Homeland Security
[DHS].
HOME PORT DOCTRINE in maritime law, refers to the rule that a vessel
that is an instrumentality of foreign commerce and engaged therein is
subject to property tax only at its “home port” regardless of where it
happens to be actually located on tax assessment day. Refers either to
the place of a vessel’s place of registration or the domicile of the
owners. Vessels engaged in interstate commerce may be taxed by
jurisdictions other than its home port, but only on an apportioned basis.
The doctrine does not bar the placing of liens on vessels in ports
other than the vessel’s home port for supplies or repairs to the vessel.
HOME RULE a means of apportioning power between state and local
governments by granting power to the electorate of a local government
unit to frame and adopt a charter of government. The effect of this grant
is to enable local government to legislate without first obtaining
permission from state legislatures.
EXAMPLE: Since the city was first chartered, it has been run by a mayor
with virtually no check on his exercise of power. Exercising their rights
under home rule, the residents vote to install a city council, which must
approve any actions taken by the mayor.
See preemption.
HOMESTEAD any house, outbuildings, and surrounding land owned and
used as a dwelling by the head of the family. Under modern HOMESTEAD
EXEMPTION LAWS, enacted in most states, any property designated as a
homestead is exempt from execution and sale by creditors. This
homestead exemption applies in some states to property taxes as well.
The exemption from claims of creditors may be extended by a
probate court upon the death of the head of the family to ensure the
surviving spouse and minor children uninterrupted possession and
enjoyment of the family home. A home so protected is referred to as a
PROBATE HOMESTEAD. See life estate.
HOMICIDE any killing of a human being by the act, agency, procurement
or culpable omission of another. An unlawful homicide, or one
resulting from an unlawful act, may constitute murder or
manslaughter.
JUSTIFIABLE HOMICIDE the killing of a human being by commandment
of the law, in the execution of public justice, in self-defense, in defense
of habitation, property or person.
HONEST SERVICES anti-corruption statutes based on the concept that it
is a crime (fraud) for officials to deprive the public of their intangible
rights to honest and impartial government. Prosecutors have convicted
politicians and executives based upon nondisclosure of material
information even without proof that they received a kickback or bribe,
but such statutes have been attacked on vagueness grounds for failing to
define a crime.
HONORABLE DISCHARGE a formal final judgment passed by the
government upon the entire military record of the soldier. It is an
authoritative declaration that he or she has left the service in a status of
honor. A person’s classification after retirement from the armed services
directly affects his or her ability to take advantage of benefits provided
to members of the services.
HONORARY generally refers to a position held without profit, fee, or
reward, and in consideration of the honor conferred by holding a
position of responsibility and trust. A position recognizing honor or
commitment. An HONORARY DEGREE is one conferred without formal
qualification in recognition by an educational institution of an
individual’s nonacademic accomplishments.
HORIZONTAL MERGER see merger [HORIZONTAL MERGER].
HORIZONTAL PRIVITY see privity [HORIZONTAL PRIVITY].
HORNBOOK a book intended to aid one with the fundamentals of the
subject being studied; a primer for the student studying in an area of
knowledge.
HORNBOOK LAW those principles of law known generally to all in the
legal profession and free from doubt and ambiguity. They are therefore
such as would probably be enunciated in a hornbook (a primer of
fundamentals).
HORS (ôr) Fr.: outside of, besides, other than. Sometimes DEHORS (de*-ôr’).
HOSTILE POSSESSION actual occupation or possession of real estate,
coupled with a claim, express or implied, of ownership, without
permission of the holder of paramount title. Hostile possession differs
from holding in subordination to the true owner, as in possession under
a lease. Hostile does not imply ill will but merely that the occupant
claims ownership against all others, including the owner of record. The
term is usually used as a condition for adverse possession. See also
notorious possession.
EXAMPLE: For 20 years, Ken has lived in a cabin he built in a wooded
section of the state. He has cleared an area adjacent to the house where
he grows whatever he uses to live, plus some extras to share with
neighbors. Ken is not the owner of the land he lives on, but, because no
one has come by in 20 years to assert ownership of the land or even to
ask him to get off, he claims it as his and is therefore in hostile
possession of it.
HOSTILE WITNESS see witness [ADVERSE [HOSTILE] WITNESS].
HOSTILE WORKPLACE workplace harassment that is severe or
pervasive enough to create a work environment that a reasonable person
would consider intimidating, hostile, or abusive. It can involve
unwelcome conduct that is based on race, color, religion, sex (including
pregnancy), sexual orientation, national origin, age, or disability.
Offensive conduct may include offensive jokes, slurs, name calling,
physical assaults or threats, intimidation, ridicule or mockery, insults or
put-downs, offensive objects or pictures, and interference with work
performance. Any person affected by the harassment, not just the person
at whom the harassment was directed, may be entitled to relief under
state law or federal anti-discrimination laws.See discrimination;
harassment [SEXUAL HARASSMENT].
HOT BLOOD an emotional state of mind such as rage, anger, resentment,
terror, or fear so as to demonstrate an absence of deliberate design to
kill, or to cause one to act on impulse without conscious reflection. See
manslaughter [HEAT OF PASSION].
HOT PURSUIT see fresh pursuit.
HOUSE all-inclusive and may include any and every kind of structure,
depending upon the context in which it is used and the purpose sought
to be effected. Whether a structure is defined as a “house” or “home”
may have constitutional implications. For Fourth Amendment
purposes, “houses” include curtilage. See domicile; dwelling house;
residence. See also halfway house; prostitution [HOUSE OF
PROSTITUTION].
HOUSE ARREST confinement to one’s home as a condition of bail or
even as one’s sentence. May include the use of electronic devices to
monitor compliance. Exceptions may be granted by the judge to allow
the person to have a specified curfew, work, or attend religious services
or medical appointments.
HUMANE DISPOSAL see euthanasia.
HUMAN RIGHTS rights inherent to all human beings on an equal and
nondiscriminatory basis. They include but are not limited to the right to
life and liberty, freedom of expression, and equality before the law; and
economic, social, and cultural rights, including the right to participate in
culture, the right to be treated with respect and dignity, and the right to
food, work, and education, among other things. All of these rights are
without distinction as to race, color, sex, language, religion, political, or
other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth, or other status.
“Recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable
rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom,
justice, and peace in the world.” United Nations Universal Declaration
of Human Rights (1948).
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS criminal law violations relating to
genocide, torture, war crimes, the use or recruitment of child soldiers as
well as sexual abuse, political, racial, or religious persecution, and other
inhumane acts which are part of a widespread or systematic practice of
atrocities. Victims are persons who individually or collectively suffered
harm, including physical or mental injury, emotional suffering,
economic loss, or substantial impairment of their fundamental rights,
through acts or omissions that constitute violations of human rights
laws, or violations of international humanitarian laws.
HUMAN TRAFFICKING see trafficking [HUMAN TRAFFICKING].
HUNG JURY one whose members [jurors] cannot reconcile their
differences of opinion and that therefore cannot reach a verdict by the
degree of agreement required (generally unanimity, but sometimes a
substantial majority).
HUSBAND-WIFE PRIVILEGE see marital communications privilege
[husband-wife privilege]; compare spousal disqualification.
HYPERLINK a word, phrase, or image that links to a new document, or a
new section within the current document, when the user clicks on it with
a computer cursor. The link interacts with a browser and allows
automatic transitioning to the linked page. Hyperlinks are most ofen
found in Internet pages but also exist in reference materials and they
may be considered a violation of copyright laws if they facilitate illegal
copying. In securities law, when an issuer includes a hyperlink in its
prospectus, the hyperlinked information becomes part of the prospectus.
HYPNOSIS a state of heightened concentration with diminished awareness
of peripheral events, increasing the suggestibility of the subject while
hypnotized. In those jurisdictions permitting the use of hypnotically
refreshed testimony, the results of hypnosis, as with the results of any
scientific test, are admissible only when they have sufficient scientific
basis to produce uniform and reasonably reliable results and will
contribute materially to the ascertainment of the truth.
HYPOTHECATE to pledge something as security without turning over
possession of it. Hypothecation creates a right in the creditor to have
the pledge sold to satisfy the claim out of the sale proceeds.
EXAMPLE: Nathaniel needs a large amount of cash to put together a
business deal. To acquire money from the bank, he hypothecates
(pledges) his diamond ring as security. The bank allows Nathaniel to
retain the ring because he is a good customer and they are not afraid he
will disappear with the money and the ring. The loan agreement
between Nathaniel and the bank is a hypothecation contract.
A mortgage on real property is a form of hypothecation contract.
Intangibles and securities are most often the subject of hypothecation
contracts. In the case of buying stock on margin the owner signs a
hypothecation agreement with the broker who handles the transaction;
the broker is then free to pledge the customer’s securities as collateral
for a bank loan or to lend the customer’s securities in connection with
selling short. Compare replevin.
HYPOTHETICAL QUESTION a question that assumes facts that the
evidence tends to show and calls for an opinion based on the hypothesis.
In trials, hypothetical questions can only be posed to an expert witness
who is qualified to give an opinion on the matter in issue.
I
IB. [IBID.] (ĭb’-ĭd) Lat.: in the same place or manner, at the same time;
abbreviation of ibidem. Used to mean “in the same book” or “on the
same page”; functions in citations to avoid repetition of source data in
the reference immediately preceding.
ICC see Interstate Commerce Commission.
ICE see Immigration and Customs Enforcement [ICE].
ID. (ĭd) Lat.: the same; abbreviation of idem. Used in citations to avoid
repetition of author’s name and title when a reference immediately
follows another to the same item.
IDB [INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BOND] see guaranteed
security.
IDENTITY THEFT [FRAUD] illegal use of another’s personal data
(name, driver’s license, social security number, medical information,
credit cards, or bank accounts) for one’s own gain. See also spam
[PHISHING].
I.E. abbeviation for id est; that is.
IGNORANCE lack of knowledge. Ignorance of the law does not justify an
act, since every person is presumed to know the law. However, mistake
of fact may provide a legal excuse. See ignorantia legis non excusat.
IGNORANTIA LEGIS NON EXCUSAT (ĭg-no@-rän’-she@-aW la@’-gĭs no*n
e*ks-ku@’-zät) Lat.: ignorance of the law is no excuse. The fact that a
defendant did not think his or her act was against the law does not
prevent the law from punishing him or her for the prohibited act.
ILLEGAL against the law. Behavior that can result in either criminal
sanctions, such as prison sentences or fines, or civil sanctions, such as
liability or injunctions, is illegal.
ILLEGAL ALIEN see alien; immigration and customs enforcement.
Compare citizen; legal permanent resident [LPR].
ILLEGALLY OBTAINED EVIDENCE evidence obtained by the police
through circumstances in which the police or a police agent violated a
person’s right against unreasonable search and seizure as guaranteed by
the Fourth Amendment or analogous state constitutional provisions.
See exclusionary rule; fruit of the poisonous tree; search and
seizure.
ILLEGITIMATE illegal or improper. Applied to children, it means born
out of wedlock, bastards.
ILLINOIS LAND TRUST see land trust [ILLINOIS LAND TRUST].
ILLUSORY PROMISE a promise too indefinite to be enforced or,
because of provisions in the promise itself, one whose fulfillment is
optional. Since such a promise is not legally binding, it is not sufficient
as consideration for a reciprocal promise and thus cannot create a valid
contract.
EXAMPLE: Tiquan promises his neighbor that, if he remembers, he will
water the neighbor’s plants twice a week while the neighbor is on
vacation. When the neighbor returns, all the plants, including three prize
ferns, are dead from lack of water. The neighbor cannot sue Tiquan for
the value of the ferns because, legally, Tiquan gave the neighbor only an
illusory promise that is not enforceable nor is its failure actionable in
court.
IMMATERIAL not material; irrelevant, nothing to do with the case; not
significant.
EXAMPLE: At Zack’s trial for robbery, the prosecution wants to introduce
evidence that Zack and his wife argue frequently. That evidence is
considered immaterial and is not allowed at the trial.
IMMEDIATE CAUSE see cause.
IMMIGRATION the movement of persons into a foreign country for the
purpose of permanently residing in that country. See alien; citizen;
legal permanent resident [LPR]; naturalized citizen.
IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT [ICE] the largest
investigative arm of the Department of Homeland Security,
responsible for identifying and shutting down vulnerabilities in the
nation’s border, economic, transportation, and infrastructure security. It
has four main offices: Detention and Removal (to identify and
apprehend illegal aliens, fugitive aliens, and criminal aliens; to manage
them while in custody; and to enforce orders of removal from the
United States), Investigations, Intelligence, and International Affairs.
ICE works closely with a broad range of law enforcement authorities.
See www.ice.gov. See also alien; citizen; Citizenship and
Immigration Services [USCIS]; deportability; green card; legal
permanent resident [LPR]; naturalized citizen.
IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE [INS] former
name of an agency whose functions are currently divided into three
agencies within the Department of Homeland Security. Immigration
services (processing citizenship, residency, and asylum requests) fall
under the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
[USCIS]. Investigation services (such as deportability) fall under the
United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement [ICE]. Border
and customs services fall under the United States Customs and Border
Protection [CBP].
IMMORAL CONDUCT behavior opposed to accepted community
standards of what is right.
IMMUNITIES, PRIVILEGES AND see privileges and immunities.
IMMUNITY right of exemption from a duty or penalty; benefit granted in
exception to the general rule. Immunity from prosecution may be
granted a witness to compel answers he or she might otherwise
withhold because of the constitutional privilege to avoid selfincrimination.
EXAMPLE: Ben asserts his privilege against self-incrimination when the
grand jury asks probing questions about his activities. If the grand jury
gives Ben immunity from criminal prosecution for anything to which he
testifies before the grand jury, Ben can no longer use the privilege. The
privilege is only available when Ben is subject to prosecution for what
he says, a fear that the immunity eliminates.
OFFICIAL IMMUNITY the immunity of a public official from liability to
anyone injured by actions in the exercise of official authority or duty.
See self-incrimination, privilege against [TRANSACTIONAL and USE
IMMUNITIES]; sovereign immunity.
IMO abbreviation for “in the matter of.”
IMPACT RULE the requirement of physical contact with an individual
person in order for damages for emotional distress to be imposed.
IMPAIRMENT OF COLLATERAL see collateral [IMPAIRMENT OF
COLLATERAL]
IMPAIR THE OBLIGATION OF A CONTRACT see obligation of a
contract.
IMPANEL see panel [IMPANEL].
IMPANELING 1. selection and swearing in of jurors; 2. listing of those
selected for a particular jury.
IMPEACH 1. to charge a public official with wrongdoing while in office;
2. to question the truthfulness of the testimony of the witness by means
of evidence that the witness is unworthy of belief.
IMPERTINENT MATTER an inappropriate matter; facts that are
irrelevant to the controversy. Under the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure, impertinent matter consists of any allegation that is not
responsive nor relevant to issues involved in the action and that could
not be put in issue or be given in evidence between the parties.
IMPLEADER the procedure by which a third party is brought into a suit
between a plaintiff and defendant, where that third party may be liable,
so as to settle all claims in a single action. It is a procedural device
available to any defendant where a third party is or may be liable to him
or her for any damages that the defendant owes the plaintiff. The
defendant is considered a “third-party plaintiff,” vis-à-vis the third party
thus joined. The device is also available to a plaintiff against whom a
counterclaim has been made. Compare interpleader; joinder. See also
cross-claim.
IMPLICATION intention, meaning; though not expressly stated, a
deduced state of mind or facts.
NECESSARY IMPLICATION a conclusion resulting from so strong a
probability of intention that an opposite intention is incredible.
IMPLIED not explicitly written or stated; determined by deduction from
known facts.
IMPLIED AUTHORITY see authority [IMPLIED AUTHORITY].
IMPLIED CONSENT consent that is found to exist solely because certain
actions or signs would lead a reasonable person to believe that consent
is present, whether or not that consent is even specifically expressed; in
criminal law, generally used as a defense against rape, whereby the
defendant claims that he acted under a reasonable and honest belief
based on the fact that the woman consented to his advance.
IMPLIED CONTRACT see contract [QUASI [IMPLIED] CONTRACT].
IMPLIED EASEMENT see easement [IMPLIED EASEMENT].
IMPLIED NOTICE see notice [IMPLIED NOTICE].
IMPLIED POWERS those powers not expressly stated but deemed
necessary to carry out the stated objectives. Decisions by the United
States Supreme Court may imply powers in the Constitution that are
not specifically enumerated. See Fourteenth Amendment; inherent
powers; necessary and proper clause. Compare enumerated powers.
IMPLIED WARRANTY see warranty [IMPLIED WARRANTIES].
IMPORT the transportation of goods into one country and out of another;
also, the article imported. The term under the customs laws requires
that the goods be brought voluntarily into this country, into the proper
port of entry, and with an intent to unload them. If customs official
determine that an article has been imported into the United States, it is
assessed a duty under customs laws unless clear evidence is proved to
the contrary. To be imported within the scope of the tariff laws, the
goods must be from a country subject to our tariff laws and the goods
must pass through the custody and control of the customs officials and
into the custody and control of the importer. See export.
IMPORTATION the act of transporting goods into a country from a foreign
country. As used in tariff statutes the term means merchandise to which
the status of an import has attached. Compare exportation.
IMPOSSIBILITY 1. a defense of nonperformance of a contract when
performance is impossible because of destruction of the subject matter
of the contract (as, for example, by fire) or death of a person necessary
for performance. Performance is then excused and the contract duty
terminated. See also frustration of purpose.
EXAMPLE: Grace contracts to purchase a boat at a nearby marina. Before
the boat is ready for use, a storm destroys the marina and all the boats
with it. Grace has an impossibility defense against performing the
contract because the boat no longer exists.
2. in civil law, an excuse for nonperformance of a contract where the
promised performance has become illegal. 3. in criminal law, applies to
situations in which facts or circumstances render commission of the
crime impossible. Thus, it is impossible to murder another if he is
already dead.
EXAMPLE: A mugger brings his victim into an alley, robs him and in a fit
of rage shoots him dead. Several hours later, a major drug deal is
transacted in the same alley. One of the dealers sees the person lying
there, believes the person is just drunk and shoots him because he wants
no witnesses to the deal. The dealer has an impossibility defense to a
murder charge because it is impossible to kill a person who is already
dead. The dealer may, however, be subjected to prosecution for
attempted murder.
IMPOST 1. a tax; 2. a charge or levy in the nature of a tax.
IMPOUND to place merchandise, funds or records in the custody of an
officer of the law.
IMPOUNDING [IMPOUNDMENT] in common law, the second step in
a distress action, in which the distrainer, having seized the chattels,
must bring the goods to a public pound pending the outcome of the
action.
IMPRESSION, CASE [MATTER] OF FIRST see first impression, case
of.
IMPRIMATUR the license granted by the government permitting the
publication of a particular book.
IMPRISONMENT the confinement of an individual to a particular place
usually as punishment for a crime; any deprivation of liberty or
detention of a person contrary to his or her will. The status of
imprisonment may affect certain constitutional rights, for example, a
right of bail guaranteed to imprisoned persons may not include juveniles
held pending delinquency proceedings. Synonymous with
incarceration. See false imprisonment.
IMPROVED LAND raw land with added physical improvements such as
roads or utilities.
IMPROVEMENT any permanent, fixed development of land or buildings
through expenditure of money or labor that more than merely replaces,
repairs or restores to original condition, and supposedly increases the
value of the property.
IMPUTE to assign legal responsibility for the act of another, because of the
relationship between those made liable and the actor, rather than
because of participation in or knowledge of the act. See vicarious
liability.
IMPUTED INCOME see income [IMPUTED INCOME].
IMPUTED LIABILITY see vicarious liability.
IN ABSENTIA (ĭn ab-se*n’-she@-aW) Lat.: in absence.
EXAMPLE: A defendant who leaves the courtroom without permission
after a trial begins may be tried in absentia. Such proceedings otherwise
require the actual presence of the defendant at all critical stages.
INADMISSIBILITY see deportation [inadmissibility]. Also means
excludable; not allowable. Inadmissible evidence is the opposite of
admissible evidence. Compare immaterial.
INALIENABLE RIGHTS fundamental rights, including the right to
practice religion, freedom of speech, due process and equal protection
of the laws, that cannot be transferred to another nor surrendered except
by the person possessing them. See Bill of Rights.
IN ARTICULO MORTIS (in är-tik’-u@-lo@môr’-tis) Lat.: in the moment of
death.
IN BANC see en banc.
IN CAMERA (in* ka*’-me*-raW) Lat.: in chambers. A term designating a
judicial act while court is not in session in the matter acted upon.
Confidential or otherwise sensitive documents are often examined in
camera to determine whether information should be revealed to the jury
and so become public record.
INCAPACITY lack of legal, physical or intellectual power. See
incompetency; minority. Compare insanity.
IN CAPITE (in ka*’pe@t) Lat.: in chief; with reference to feudal tenures, as
estate in land held by direct grant of the king.
INCARCERATION confinement in prison; imprisonment.
INCENDIARY 1. arsonist; one who maliciously sets property on fire; 2. an
object capable of starting and sustaining a fire, an incendiary device.
See arson.
INCEST a criminal offense of sexual intercourse between members of a
family, or those between whom marriage would be illegal because of
blood relationship.
IN CHAMBERS see in camera.
IN CHIEF principal, primary. At trial, the initial presentation of a party’s
evidence constitutes that party’s case in chief, to which rebuttal is
allowed.
INCHOATE not yet completed. In inchoate offenses, something remains to
be done before the crime can be accomplished as contemplated. See
attempt; conspiracy; solicitation.
INCHOATE DOWER [INCHOATE RIGHT OF DOWER] the interest
that a wife has in her husband’s lands before his death, and contingent
upon his predeceasing her. The right of dower is considered inchoate
until the husband’s death, at which time the widow has a vested right to
a life estate.
INCIDENTAL BENEFICIARY see beneficiary [INCIDENTAL
BENEFICIARY].
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES see damages [INCIDENTAL DAMAGES].
INCIDENT OF OWNERSHIP an aspect of the legal title to property; for
federal estate tax purposes, if a decedent possessed any “incidents of
ownership” over life insurance at the time of his or her death, the value
of these insurance policies would be includable in the decedent’s gross
estate.
INCLOSURE any land enclosed by something other than an imaginary
boundary line, i.e., some wall, hedge, fence, ditch, or other actual
obstruction. The word “town” derives from the Anglo-Saxon word
“tun,” meaning “inclosure.” Compare close.
INCOME an economic benefit; money or value received.
ACTIVE INCOME earned income. The Internal Revenue Service considers
salaries, tips, commissions, and income from businesses in which the
taxpayer materially participates to be types of active income. Compare
PASSIVE INCOME and PORTFOLIO INCOME (below).
ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME the gross income of the taxpayer reduced by
specified deductions, generally business deductions.
CASH EQUIVALENT DOCTRINE the doctrine that property received by a
taxpayer is includable in income if it can be converted into cash. The
amount of income is the amount of such cash.
CONSTRUCTIVE RECEIPT OF INCOME a doctrine under which a taxpayer is
required to include in gross income amounts that, though not actually
received, are deemed received during the tax year. Thus there is
constructive receipt when income is made available to a taxpayer
without substantial restriction or condition on the taxpayer’s right to
exercise control over the income. Under this theory, interest credited on
a savings account must be included in income even though the taxpayer
does not withdraw it, since he or she had the right to withdraw it. The
doctrine is to be distinguished from the cash equivalent doctrine.
FIXED INCOME see fixed income.
GROSS INCOME the total of the taxpayer’s income from any source,
except items specifically excluded by the Internal Revenue Code and
other items not subject to tax, such as capital income and FRINGE
BENEFITS (see benefit).
IMPUTED INCOME economic benefit a taxpayer obtains through
performance of his or her own services or through the use of his or her
own property. In general, imputed income is not subject to INCOME
TAXES (see tax). For example, if a taxpayer is a plumber and repairs his
or her own toilet, such repair service is not subject to tax.
INCOME AVERAGE see income averaging.
INCOME IN RESPECT OF A DECEDENT income earned by a taxpayer before
his or her death but received by, and taxed to, the taxpayer’s heirs or
personal representatives.
INCOME SPLITTING see income splitting.
NET INCOME see net income.
ORDINARY INCOME income that is fully subject to ordinary income tax
rates, as distinguished from income that is subject to the benefit of
special deductions for capital gains and losses.
PASSIVE INCOME effectively “unearned” income. The Internal Revenue
Service considers passive income to be rental activity or trade or
business activity in which the taxpayer does not materially participate.
Such income is usually taxable and, generally, losses from passive
income cannot offset active or portfolio income. Compare ACTIVE
INCOME (above) and PORTFOLIO INCOME (below).
PORTFOLIO INCOME generally defined by the Internal Revenue Service
as income from dividends and interest income from securities, royalties,
annuities, and capital gains. It does not come from passive income and
is not earned from normal business activity. Compare ACTIVE INCOME
and PASSIVE INCOME (above).
TAXABLE INCOME gross income reduced by deductions allowable in
obtaining adjusted gross income and further reduced by deductions
allowable in calculating itemized deductions.
INCOME AVERAGING a method of calculating tax liability to minimize
adverse consequences to a taxpayer with substantial fluctuations in
income from year to year; permits a taxpayer to compute his or her tax
as if the higher amount of income had been earned equally over that
year and the previous four years.
INCOME SPLITTING a device that allows married taxpayers to calculate
their joint taxes as if one half of their joint taxable income were earned
by each spouse. See return; income tax [JOINT RETURN]. Compare
assignment of income.
INCOME STATEMENT a financial statement that gives operating results,
such as net income and loss, depreciation, for a specific period; also
referred to as EARNINGS REPORT, OPERATING STATEMENT andPROFIT-ANDLOSS STATEMENT. Statements normally cover 12 months of operations
with interim statements at quarterly periods in current fiscal or calendar
years. Operations divide into two categories of transactions—sales or
revenue generation and expenses incurred in the production of sales or
revenues. A typical manufacturing business sells products to its
customers which, net of returns and discounts, results in “net sales”
income. Net income or profit is “net sales” less all expenses. Net
income is obtained after taxes are deducted at the prevailing rate. Net
income (or “loss” should expenses exceed sales) is available to invest in
the business, pay dividends, etc., as decided by owners of the enterprise.
The principal expense item is usually COST OF GOODS SOLD, which
includes purchase of raw materials, direct labor and factory overhead
such as power, rent, etc. Next comes selling, general, and administrative
expenses, which include salaries of salespersons, staff personnel,
managers and offices, cost of administrative buildings and support
services, and advertising expenses. Depreciation expense is stated
separately since it is not an actual cash outlay and since additional
comment on the method used in calculating depreciation is required.
See balance sheet.
INCOME TAX see tax [INCOME TAX]; return, income tax.
INCOMPETENCY inability, disqualification, incapacity. 1. lack of legal
qualifications or fitness to discharge a required duty; 2. lack of physical,
intellectual or moral fitness.
EXAMPLE: Herman is arrested for assault. Prior to his trial, a judge
determines that he is incompetent, that he cannot aid in his defense nor
can he endure the rigors of a criminal trial without suffering a mental
breakdown. Herman may at some point be declared competent to stand
trial, but at the present time his trial for assault is postponed.
When a person is adjudicated incompetent, a guardian is appointed to
manage the incompetent’s affairs, unless the incompetent recovers
competency to the satisfaction of the court. An adjudicated incompetent
lacks capacity to contract and his contracts are void. Compare
competent.
INCOMPETENT EVIDENCE evidence that is not admissible. Compare
competent.
INCONSISTENT contradictory to one another. In pleading, inconsistent
facts or legal theories may be pled in the alternative. See alternative
pleading.
INCONSISTENT STATEMENT see prior inconsistent statement.
INCONTESTABILITY CLAUSE see noncontestability
[incontestability] clause.
INCONVENIENT FORUM see forum non conveniens.
INCORPORATE to organize and be granted status as a corporation by
following prescribed legal procedures. See articles of incorporation.
INCORPORATION, SELECTIVE see selective incorporation.
INCORPOREAL see corporeal.
INCORPOREAL HEREDITAMENT see hereditament.
INCORPOREAL PROPERTY intangible property, evidencing something
of value but having no inherent value independent thereof, such as a
stock certificate. See intangible property.
INCORRIGIBLE uncorrectable; one whose behavior cannot be made to
conform to standards dictated by law. See criminal [HABITUAL
OFFENDER]; recidivist.
INCREMENT an amount of increase in number or value.
INCRIMINATE 1. to hold another, or oneself, responsible for criminal
misconduct; 2 to involve someone, or oneself, in an accusation of a
crime.
INCROACH to use unlawfully or otherwise impair possession or title to
another’s property. See encroach; trespass.
INCULPATORY tending to incriminate or bring about a criminal
conviction. Compare exculpatory.
INCUMBENT person in present possession of an office or position. See de
facto [DE FACTO INCUMBENT].
INCUMBRANCE see encumbrance.
INDEBITATUS ASSUMPSIT (ĭn-de*-bĭ-ta@-tu*s aWs-su*mp’-sĭt) Lat.: to be
indebted, to have undertaken a debt. At common law, a form of action
founded in contract in which the plaintiff alleges that the defendant has
undertaken a debt and has failed to satisfy it.
INDEBTEDNESS, INVOLUNTARY see bankruptcy [INVOLUNTARY
PROCEEDING].
INDECENT vulgar, offensive, obscene.
INDECENT EXPOSURE see lewdness [INDECENT EXPOSURE].
INDEFEASIBLE incapable of being defeated or altered. An indefeasible
estate is absolute and cannot be changed by any condition.
EXAMPLE: A sister conveys an indefeasible estate to her brother. The
brother has perfect title to the land and can do with it as he pleases,
since there is no circumstance that can operate to deprive him of title.
INDEFINITE FAILURE OF ISSUE see failure of issue.
IN DELICTO (ĭn de*-lĭk’-to@) Lat.: at fault.
INDEMNIFY 1. to insure; to secure against loss or damage that may occur
in the future; 2. to compensate for loss or damage already suffered; 3. to
save harmless. See damages; insurance.
INDEMNITY 1. the obligation to make good any loss or damage another
person has incurred or may incur; 2. the right that the person suffering
loss or damage is entitled to claim.
EXAMPLE: Beatrice buys a piece of land from Sherman. Unbeknown to
Beatrice, the land was encumbered by a lien for several years of back
taxes that Sherman had not paid. Beatrice pays the taxes but has a right
of indemnity against Sherman for the tax liability.
Compare contribution.
INDENTURE 1. a deed between two parties conveying real estate by
which both parties assume obligations. Indenture implies a sealed
instrument; 2. a lengthy written agreement that sets forth terms under
which bonds or debentures may be issued.
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR see contractor [INDEPENDENT
CONTRACTOR].
INDEPENDENT COVENANTS see covenant [INDEPENDENT [MUTUAL]
COVENANTS].
INDETERMINATE SENTENCE see sentence [INDETERMINATE
SENTENCE].
INDEX FUND a portfolio of stocks selected to match a stock market index
number, usually the Standard & Poor’s Industrial Index or the Standard
& Poor’s Composite Index. The guiding principle is creation of a proxy
for the selected index since the index itself contains an unmanageably
large number of stocks.
INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION see Indian law [INDIAN CLAIMS
COMMISSION].
INDIAN LAW area of law relating to Native Americans. “Native
American” is the preferred term for indigenous Americans; however,
many statutes and treaties use the term “Indian” and it is for that reason
only that the reference is included herein. Title 25 of the United States
Code contains the federal laws regulating Native American affairs. The
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS (BIA) is a bureau of the Interior Department.
The BIA and the ADMINISTRATION FOR NATIVE AMERICANS are federal
agencies concerned with the interaction between the federal government
and Native Americans. The INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION determines
claims brought by tribes against the government.
INDIAN RESERVATION lands set aside for the use and occupancy of tribes
of Native Americans. The federal government retains title to and
exercises supervision and administration over the lands.
INDIAN TITLE also known as ABORIGINAL TITLE, inherent right of Native
American tribes to occupy certain territory by virtue of their original
occupancy of such territory and to the exclusion of other Native
American tribes. This title cannot be conveyed as it consists of
possession and not ownership.
INDIAN RESERVATION see Indian law [INDIAN RESERVATION].
INDIAN TITLE see Indian law [INDIAN TITLE].
INDICATION OF SOURCE see appellation of origin [INDICATION OF
SOURCE].
INDICIA (ĭn-dĭ’-she@-aW) Lat.: indications; signs or circumstances that tend
to support a belief in a proposition as being probable, but that do not
prove to a certainty the truth of the proposition. It is often said to be
synonymous with circumstantial evidence. Where one exercises
dominion and control over personal property as if it were his or her
own, such behavior is an indicium of ownership. A carbon copy of a bill
of sale has also been held to be an indicia of title.
“Indicia” is important in many contexts. Thus, where the owner of
property is responsible for giving another indicia of ownership, that
other person may effectively transfer the owner’s interest to a bona fide
purchaser. Indicia of reliability are necessary to use information
supplied by an informer as a basis to support a search warrant.
INDICIUM (ĭn-dĭ’-she@-u*m) Lat.: singular of indicia.
INDICTABLE OFFENSES crimes that can be prosecuted by the GRAND
JURY (see jury) indicting the accused. In common law, these crimes
were known as felonies and were defined by the punishment for them—
either death, forfeiture of all one’s property or mutilation. The crimes
included murder, treason, robbery, assault, rape, arson, burglary,
and larceny. These crimes could also be prosecuted by individuals
bringing lawsuits against the defendants. Today felonies, as defined by
modern statutes, are still prosecuted by indictment. Compare
misdemeanor. See crime; prosecution; suit.
INDICTION declaration; proclamation. In Roman times, the determination
of land taxes for a 15-year period. Also a method of dating manuscripts.
INDICTMENT a formal written accusation, drawn up and submitted
under oath to a GRAND JURY (see jury) by the public prosecuting
attorney, charging one or more persons with a crime. The grand jury
must determine whether the accusation, if proved, would be sufficient
for conviction of the accused, in which case the indictment is indorsed
by the foreman as a TRUE BILL. Once an indictment is filed, the matter
passes to the Court. Indictments also serve to inform an accused of the
offense with which he is charged and must be clear enough to enable
him to prepare his defense adequately. Compare accusation; charge;
complaint; information; presentment.
INDIGENT 1. generally, a person who is poor, financially destitute; 2. in a
legal context, a person found by a court to be unable to hire a lawyer or
otherwise meet the expense of defending a criminal matter, at which
point defense counsel is appointed by the court. See in forma
pauperis; public defender.
INDIGNITY affront to the personality of another; lack of reverence for the
personality of one’s spouse. Indignity is a ground for divorce in some
states; may consist of vulgarity, unmerited reproach, malignant ridicule
and any other plain expression of settled hate or estrangement. See
mental cruelty.
INDIRECT ATTACK see collateral attack.
INDIRECT EVIDENCE evidence that supports a factual theory but that
does not make it explicit; circumstantial evidence.
INDISPENSABLE EVIDENCE evidence necessary to prove a submitted
fact.
INDISPENSABLE PARTY a party who has such an interest in the
litigation that a final decree cannot be issued without either affecting
that interest or determining the controversy in a way inconsistent with
equity and good conscience. Therefore, an action may not proceed
without an indispensable party, who must be joined to the action,
because his or her nonjoinder would result in prejudice to his or her
rights and the rights of other parties to the action.
INDIVIDUAL RETIREMENT ACCOUNT [IRA] designed for a person
to save and invest money for use during retirement. Contributions into
the account may range from totally tax deductible to totally non tax
deductible, depending upon a person’s income tax filing status and
adjusted gross income, and whether the person is an active participant in
an employer-sponsored qualified retirement plan.
INHERITED IRA individual retirement account(s) that are left to one or
more beneficiaries when the original IRA owner dies. Upon the death
of the IRA owner the decedent’s beneficiaries inherit the IRA and are
allowed to keep the inherited IRA assets tax-deferred—until the
Internal Revenue Service requires the funds be distributed. A
beneficiary of an inherited IRA can either be the original IRA owner’s
spouse, children, or any non-spouse persons or a corporation but if it is
not the spouse, the spouse usually has to sign giving consent to the other
beneficiary. See retirement plan.
INDORSEE one to whom a negotiable instrument is assigned by
indorsement. For instance, the payee or holder of a check may write on
the back of the check “pay to X” and sign below. X is the indorsee. In
the absense of fraud or illegality, an indorsee has all of the right, title,
and interest in a negotiable instrument that the indorser had prior to
assignment.
INDORSEMENT signature on the back of an instrument, with or without
other words, the effect of which is to transfer the instrument and to
create a new, independent contract by which the indorser becomes a
party to the instrument and liable, on certain conditions, for its payment.
ACCOMMODATION INDORSEMENT one made without consideration,
solely to extend credit to the holder by the indorser, generally to enable
the holder to obtain credit or money from another on the basis of the
indorsement.
BLANK INDORSEMENT one that specifies no particular party to whom the
indorsed instrument is exclusively payable, and that therefore authorizes
negotiation by the bearer upon delivery alone.
RESTRICTIVE INDORSEMENT one that limits transferability of the
instrument.
SPECIAL INDORSEMENT one that specifies to whose order the instrument
shall be payable. The instrument is then negotiable only by such person
unless he or she makes a further indorsement.
INDORSER one who indorses negotiable paper. For instance, the payee or
holder of a check may indorse the check by signing it on the back. An
indorser is liable to pay the negotiable instrument in case it is
dishonored.
INDUCEMENT offer enticing or persuading another person to take an
action, such as entering into a contract.
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BOND [IDB] see guaranteed
security.
INDUSTRIAL RESERVE BANK [IRB] see guaranteed security.
INELIGIBILITY disqualification; legal inability to perform some task or
assume some office. See disqualify.
IN ESCROW held in an escrow account, held by one who is not a party to
a transaction for future delivery to a party upon the occurrence or
nonoccurrence of a specific event or events.
IN ESSE (ĭn e*s’-e@) Lat.: in existence. Compare in posse.
IN EXTREMIS (ĭn e*ks-tre*’-mĭs) Lat.: in extreme circumstances;
especially, on the brink of death. Compare causa [CAUSA MORTIS].
INFAMOUS CRIME a crime that, in common law, rendered the convicted
person incompetent as a witness, because of presumed
untrustworthiness. See crimen falsi; felony; treason.
INFANCY the legal status preceding majority; minority.
IN FEE (SIMPLE) absolute ownership of an estate in land. See fee
simple.
INFERENCE a process of reasoning by which a proposition is derived as a
logical consequence from given facts.
INFERENCE, ADVERSE see adverse inference.
INFERENCE, NECESSARY see necessary inference.
INFERIOR COURT a court whose decision is subject to review by
another court, which is referred to as a SUPERIOR COURT.
INFEUDATION the act of granting a freehold estate; same as feoffment
or enfeoffment.
INFIRM sickly; a weak person. In particular circumstances the testimony
of an infirm person may be obtained in a manner that differs from
regular procedure to prevent its loss through the death of the witness.
See de bene esse.
INFLUENCE, UNDUE see undue influence.
INFORMAL PROCEEDINGS in probate law, the admission of a will to
probate without the requirements necessary in an adversarial
proceeding, such as notice to interested parties.
INFORMANT see informer.
IN FORMA PAUPERIS (in fôr’-maW paw-pe*r’-ĭs) Lat.: in the manner of a
pauper. In pleadings, in forma pauperis grants the right to sue without
assuming the burden of costs or formalities of pleading. A criminal
defendant granted permission to proceed in forma pauperis may be
entitled to court-appointed counsel.
INFORMATION a written accusation of crime signed by the prosecutor,
charging a person with the commission of a crime; an alternative to
indictment as a means of starting a criminal prosecution. The purpose
of an information is to inform the defendant of the charges against him
or her and to inform the court of the factual basis of the charges.
INFORMATION AND BELIEF verification short of actual knowledge,
but based on reasonable, good faith efforts to determine truth or falsity.
The term is used with reference to documents requiring verification,
such as requests for search warrants, responses to interrogatories,
complaints, pleadings, etc.
INFORMATION RETURN see return [INFORMATION RETURN].
INFORMED CONSENT consent given only after full disclosure of what
is being consented to; constitutionally required in certain areas where
one may consent to what otherwise would be an unconstitutional
violation of a right.
EXAMPLE: Jan is arrested for burglary. She decides to handle her case by
herself, without the assistance of an attorney. Since she has a
constitutional right to an attorney and to have one appointed if she
cannot afford one, a judge must insure that her decision is based on
informed consent. Such consent would include an understanding of her
right to an attorney and what her decision entails.
The phrase is also used in tort law, where a patient must be told the
nature and risks of a medical procedure before the physician can validly
claim exemption from liability for battery or from responsibility for
medical complications.
Compare Miranda rule; self-incrimination, privilege against.
INFORMER one who, on a confidential basis, gives information about
some wrongdoing to the police or other governmental authorities. Often
the information is given in the hope that some favor or benefit is given
to the tipster in return for the useful information provided.
EXAMPLE: Patty called the crime stoppers hotline with the name of a
person she recently saw displaying a very large amount of cash. She
hoped that the information would lead to a reward for the arrest and
conviction of a perpetrator in the case of a recent bank robbery.
INFORMER’S PRIVILEGE the privilege of the government to not reveal
the identity of an informer. The identity of an informant need not be
disclosed to the defendant at a suppression hearing so long as the person
relying upon the informer’s information has testified and has been
cross-examined as to what the informant told him or her and as to why
the information was believed to be trustworthy. The privilege may not
survive a demand for disclosure at the trial level, however, if necessary
to insure a fair trial. In no event can the informer’s true identity be
withheld from the accused once the prosecution decides to use the
informer as a government witness in a criminal trial.
INFRA (ĭn’-fraW) Lat.: below; following; beneath. In text the term refers to a
discussion or a citation appearing subsequently; the opposite of supra
(“above”).
INFRINGEMENT breach; violation; unauthorized distribution. See patent
infringement. See copyright; trademark; plagiarism.
INFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT see copyright [INFRINGEMENT];
plagiarism.
INFRINGEMENT OF PATENT see patent infringement.
IN FUTURO (ĭn fu@-tu@’-ro@) Lat.: in the future; at a later date.
IN GENERE (ĭn ge*’-ne*-ra@) Lat.: in kind; of the same class or species.
INGRESS AND EGRESS 1. entrance and departure; 2. means of entering
and leaving; 3. the right to do so. See easement.
IN GROSS at large. See easement [EASEMENT IN GROSS].
IN HAEC VERBA (ĭn he@c ve*r’-bä) Lat.: in these words.
INHERENT DEFECT a defect that exists in an item regardless of the use
made of that item. Although an inherent defect may not be readily
detectable, a manufacturer is nonetheless strictly liable for any injury
caused by it. Synonymous with latent defect.
INHERENT POWERS those powers an authority such as a court or a
government must have in order to achieve the purposes for which it was
created.
INHERENT CONSTITUTIONAL POWERS the federal government possesses
all those inherent and implied powers that, at the time of adopting the
Constitution, were generally considered to belong to every government
as such, and as being essential to the exercise of its functions. These
powers include the ability to conduct foreign affairs, to exclude and
deport aliens, to protect persons in federal custody or employment, to
protect federal elections, and to protect federally created or federally
guaranteed rights.
INHERENT RIGHT a right that exists by reason of an individual’s status
as an individual and is not derived from any other source.
INHERIT technically, to take as an heir at law solely by descent, rather
than by devise; more commonly used to signify taking either by devise
(i.e., by will) or by descent (i.e., from one’s ancestor by operation of
law).
INHERITANCE real property or personal property that is received by
heirs according to the laws of descent and distribution. A
nontechnical meaning of inheritance includes property passed by will.
INHERITED IRA see individual retirement account [INHERITED IRA].
IN HOC (ĭn ho*k) Lat.: in this; in reference to this.
IN INVITUM (ĭn ĭn-ve@’-tu*m) Lat.: against the will of the other party.
INITIATIVE a process by which a small percentage of voters may propose
legislation and compel officials to submit the proposed legislation to
voters. It involves the power of the people to propose bills and laws and
to enact or reject them at the polls, independent of legislative assembly.
In contrast, referendum is the right of the people to have submitted for
their approval or rejection an act passed by the legislature. Referendum
is a process by which a small percentage of voters may delay effective
legislation and compel officials to submit it for voter approval or
rejection.
Initiative is a form of direct legislation by the people consisting of
two parts: petition and election. An initiative does not become effective
until passed by voters and its availability does not remedy the denial of
the right to referendum.
IN JEOPARDY see double jeopardy; jeopardy.
INJUNCTION a judicial remedy awarded to restrain a particular activity;
first used by courts of equity to prevent conduct contrary to equity and
good conscience.
The injunction is a preventive measure to guard against future
injuries, rather than one that affords a remedy for past injuries.
FINAL INJUNCTIONS see PERMANENT [FINAL] INJUNCTIONS (below).
INTERLOCUTORY INJUNCTIONS see TEMPORARY [INTERLOCUTORY]
INJUNCTIONS (below).
MANDATORY INJUNCTION one requiring positive action, rather than one
forbidding a party to act.
EXAMPLE: A landlord refuses to supply his tenants with heat during the
winter months. Regardless of the reasons for the landlord’s action, a
court might issue a mandatory injunction forcing the landlord to supply
heat.
PERMANENT INJUNCTION one issued upon completion of a trial in which
the injunction has been actively sought.
TEMPORARY [INTERLOCUTORY] INJUNCTION one that will expire at a
particular time, and that is typically used to maintain the status quo or
preserve the subject matter of the litigation during trial.
INJURIA ABSQUE DAMNO (ĭn-ju@’-re@-aW äb’-skwa@däm’-no@) Lat.: wrong
without damage; insult without damage. Where a cause of action
requires that damages be pleaded, this maxim expresses the rule that a
wrong that causes no legally recognized damage cannot give rise to a
cause of action. But see damages [NOMINAL DAMAGES].
INJURIA NON EXCUSAT INJURIAM (ĭn-ju@’-re@-aW no*n e*x-ku@’-zät ĭn-ju@-
re@-äm) Lat.: one wrong does not justify another.
INJURIOUS FALSEHOOD the tort of causing injury to a person’s
reputation through libel or slander (“defamation”) or to a person’s
business through harmful statements (“disparagement”).
INJURY wrong or damage done to another, either in his or her person,
rights, reputation or property. LEGAL INJURY is any damage that results
from a violation of a legal right and that the law will recognize as
deserving of redress. Compare damnum absque injuria; depreciation;
fault. See also damages; relief; remedy.
EXAMPLE: Federal law prohibits discrimination based on race. May, a
black woman, is refused a job because of her race. Even if she gets
another job and although no physical injury resulted to her, she has been
injured in the eyes of the law and can pursue a monetary remedy or an
award of the job she was refused.
IN KIND 1. of the same or similar type or quality; 2. in the same or similar
manner.
IN LIMINE (ĭn lĭ’-mĭ-ne@) Lat.: at the beginning or the threshold. See
motion in limine.
IN LOCO PARENTIS (ĭn lo@’-ko@pä-re*n’-tĭs) Lat.: in the place of a parent.
Refers to a person or agency who has assumed the obligations of a
parent. Commonly refers to the role of a residential institution such as a
boarding school, in relation to the minors in its care.
INMATE one who is committed to an institution, such as a prisoner at a
prison. See jail; penal institution.
INMATE ADVOCATE see advocate [INMATE ADVOCATE].
IN MORTMAIN see mortmain.
INNOCENT PURCHASER see bona fide purchaser.
INNS OF COURT four private societies in England that prepare students
for the practice of law and that alone may admit them to the bar; that is,
confer the rank of barrister. The four inns of court are Inner Temple,
Middle Temple, Lincoln’s Inn, Gray’s Inn.
INNUENDO that part of a pleading in an action for libel that explains,
improperly, the spoken or written words that are the basis of the action,
thereby attaching to those words more than their plain meaning. The
plaintiff in a libel action cannot enlarge or change original language by
innuendo, since the purpose of innuendo is to explain the application of
words used, and words that are not libelous in themselves cannot be
made so by innuendo.
IN OMNIBUS (ĭn o*m’-nĭ-bu@s) Lat.: in all things; in all the world; in all
nature; in all respects.
IN PAIS (ĭn pe*’-ĭs) Fr.: in the country, neighborhood. Applies to a
transaction handled outside the court or without a legal proceeding.
IN PARI DELICTO (ĭn pä’-re@de@-lĭk’-to@) Lat.: in equal fault. Refers to an
exception to the general rule that illegal transactions or contracts are
not legally enforceable; thus, where the parties to an illegal agreement
are not in pari delicto, the agreement may nevertheless be enforceable
at equity by the innocent or less guilty party. See also clean hands;
duress; fraud.
IN PARI MATERIA (ĭn pä’-re@mä-te*r’-e@-aW) Lat.: on like subject matter.
Statutes or document provisions that relate to the same person or
subject. In the construction or interpretation of a statute or instrument,
the various provisions of the statute or instrument and all other acts or
instruments on the same subject or having the same purpose are to be
read together as one law or agreement, giving equal importance to each.
IN PERPETUITY existing forever.
IN PERSONAM (ĭn pe*r-so@’-näm) Lat.: into or against the person. In
pleading, an action against a person or persons, founded on personal
liability and requiring jurisdiction by the court over the person sought
to be held liable, i.e., the defendant.
EXAMPLE: C.J. causes an accident while driving recklessly. He is sued in
personam in the state where the accident occurred, but he claims that as
an out-of-state driver the courts of that state do not have jurisdiction
over him and cannot force him to answer the suit. Although that might
be true without applicable statutes, every state has laws automatically
establishing jurisdiction over persons using their highways. If the victim
of the accident wins this suit, based on the merits, he can use the
judgment against C.J. in any other state.
In such an action, the plaintiff seeks either to subject defendant’s
general assets to execution in order to satisfy a money judgment, or to
obtain a judgment directing defendant to do an act or refrain from doing
an act.
Compare in rem.
IN POSSE (ĭn po*s’-e@) Lat.: in the future, that which is not yet but that may
exist. Compare in esse.
IN PRAESENTI (ĭn pra@-ze*n’-te@) Lat.: in the present. Often signifies a
presently effective act or interest, distinguished from one effective in
futuro.
IN QUANTUM MERUIT see quantum meruit.
INQUEST 1. a judicial inquiry; 2. an inquiry made by a coroner to
determine cause of death of one who has been killed, has died suddenly,
or under suspicious circumstances or in prison.
INQUIRY NOTICE see notice [IMPLIED NOTICE].
IN RE (ĭn ra@) Lat.: in the matter of. Usually signifies a legal proceeding
with no opponent, but rather judicial disposition of a thing, or res, such
as the estate of a decedent.
IN REM (ĭn re*m) Lat.: into or against the thing. Signifies actions against
the res, or thing, rather than against the person. The goal of a
proceeding in rem is the disposition of property without reference to the
title of individual claimants. Compare in personam.
ACTIONS IN REM those that seek not to impose personal liability but
rather to affect the interests of persons in a specific thing (or res). A
few such actions purport to affect the interests of all persons (“all the
world”) in the same thing as, for example, in actions to protect the
environment; most of them seek to affect the interests of only particular
persons in the thing. Typical modern examples are actions for partition
of, or for foreclosure of a lien upon, or to quiet title to, real estate. The
concept of in rem actions has been extended to those that seek to affect
the condition of a thing as well as the thing itself.
ACTIONS QUASI IN REM actions based on a claim for money damages
begun by attachment or garnishment or other seizure of property
where the court has no jurisdiction over the person of the defendant but
has jurisdiction over a thing belonging to the defendant or over a person
who is indebted or under a duty to the defendant.
INSANE DELUSION see delusion.
INSANITY mental illness. The term may be used to signify lack of
criminal responsibility, need for commitment to a mental institution,
inability to transact business, inability to stand trial (i.e., to assist in
one’s own defense). Compare incompetency; non compos mentis; non
sui juris. See Durham rule; M’Naghten rule.
INSANITY, PLEA OF see plea [INSANITY PLEA].
IN SE (ĭn sa@) Lat.: in and of itself.
INSIDER a person whose opportunity to profit from his or her position of
power in a business is limited by law to safeguard the public good. Both
federal securities acts and state blue sky laws regulate stock
transactions of individuals with access to inside information about a
corporation, since the prospect of insider trading may inhibit
investment by the general public due to their concern that the price of
securities has been artificially inflated or deflated by such trading.
INSIDER TRADING buying or selling of corporation stock by a corporate
officer who profits by his or her access to information not available to
the public. Corporate insiders who trade on the basis of nonpublic
corporate information may be exposed to liability under state or federal
law, because of a policy that everybody should have equal access to
information and that insiders should not profit personally from
something that belongs to the corporation.
INSOLVENCY 1. inability to meet financial obligations as they mature in
the ordinary course of business; 2. excess of liabilities over assets at any
given time. In the absence of definition by statute, the first definition is
more widely recognized; however, statutory definition is common
today. See bankruptcy.
EXAMPLE: Baden Company borrows money from a bank to pay overdue
debts in the hope that business will improve. That hope is not realized,
and payments to the bank as well as other debts begin to develop again.
Baden is finally declared insolvent. If any assets remain in the company,
Baden’s creditors and/or a court will divide them in some fair fashion.
INSOLVENCY PROCEEDINGS see bankruptcy.
IN SPECIE (ĭn spe@’-she@) Lat.: in like form. To repay a loan in specie is to
return the same kind of goods as were borrowed.
INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS right of parties in a civil action to
view and copy documents in the possession of the court and essential to
the adverse party’s cause of action. This is done as part of the
discovery process before trial; but apart from the production for pretrial
inspection, a party may by the use of a subpoena duces tecum require
the production of documents at the time of trial for the purpose of
introducing them into evidence.
INSTALLMENT the partial satisfaction of a debt or other obligation.
INSTALLMENT CONTRACT a contract in which the obligation of one
or more of the parties—such as an obligation to pay money, deliver
goods or render services—is divided into a series of successive
performances.
EXAMPLE: Flavor Bread Company wants to insure supplies of wheat over
the next five years. It writes an installment contract with a farmer’s
cooperative to deliver monthly shipments of wheat to its plant over the
five-year period, with Flavor’s obligation to pay likewise apportioned
over the five-year period. Since the contract is long-term, prices are
arrived at by a formula that can vary each month.
INSTALLMENT METHOD see accounting method [INSTALLMENT
METHOD OF ACCOUNTING].
INSTALLMENT SALE a contract by which goods are purchased now but
paid for over a period of time by a number of installments. Consumers
have extensive protection against abusive installment sales of consumer
goods under the Truth-in-Lending Act, which governs advertising, the
computation of interest on upaid installments, and other aspects of such
sales.
INSTANT MATTER see sub judice.
IN STATU QUO (ĭn stä’-tu@ kwo@) Lat.: in the existing situation or
condition. In the same position a party is in currently or was in at some
relevant prior time.
IN STATU QUO ANTE in a contract means being placed in the same
position in which a party was at the time of the inception of the contract
that is sought to be rescinded.
INSTITUTION see correctional institution; penal institution.
INSTRUCTION the judge’s directions to the jury before their
deliberation, informing them of the law applicable to the case, to guide
them in reaching a verdict according to law and the evidence. An
instruction to the jury is a charge to the jury, more a command than a
request.
INSTRUMENT in commercial law, a written formal document that records
an act or agreement and provides the evidence of that act or agreement.
INSUFFICIENT EVIDENCE a term usually referred to in a decision by a
judge that a prosecutor or other party charged with proving a crime has
failed to provide the minimum of evidence necessary to even ask a jury
to decide a question of fact; results in a directed verdict in favor of a
defendant. If an appellate court decides that the evidence at a
defendant’s trial is insufficient, it will reverse the conviction and
dismiss the charges that the State failed to prove at the trial.
INSURABLE INTEREST a relationship with a person or thing that
supports issuance of an insurance policy. A person having an insurable
interest can derive financial advantage from preservation of the subject
matter insured or suffer loss from its destruction.
An insurable interest in the life of another requires that the continued
life of the insured be of real interest to the insuring party. The
connection may be financial (as when a creditor insures the life of his
or her debtor) or it may consist of familial or other ties of affection.
EXAMPLE: A basketball team drafts Astor, the best player in college. His
contract will pay him over a million dollars a year for ten years. The
team has an insurable interest in Astor and will undoubtedly take out an
insurance policy to protect their investment.
INSURANCE the benefit from an agreement by one party (insurer) to
provide the other (insured), for a consideration, money or some other
benefit in the event of the loss of, or injury to, a specified person or
thing in which the other has an interest.
ENDOWMENT INSURANCE insurance for a specified amount payable to the
insured at the expiration of a certain period or to a designated
beneficiary immediately upon the death of the insured.
NO FAULT INSURANCE a system of automobile insurance where a party
injured in an automobile accident recovers damages up to a specific
amount against his own insurance company regardless of who was at
fault in the accident. Damages in excess of the specified amount are
recovered by a lawsuit against the party who caused the accident. “No
fault insurance” is designed to reduce the amount of litigation resulting
from minor automobile accidents and to make the system of
compensating victims of such accidents more efficient.
TERM INSURANCE insurance for the period for which a premium has
been paid. With life insurance it is a contract in which the insured pays
the actual cost of insurance for each assessment period, without
defraying a future deficit from the cost of insuring older persons.
Economical premium eliminates cash surrender value and loan value.
TITLE INSURANCE see title insurance.
WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE insurance upon the life of the insured for a
fixed death benefit at a definite annual premium; synonymous with
ordinary life insurance or straight life insurance.
INSURED the person whose interests are protected by an insurance
policy; the person who contracts for a policy of insurance that
indemnifies him against loss of property, life or health.
INSURRECTION a violent uprising of part or all of the people against the
government or other authority.
INTANGIBLE ASSET an asset that has no physical being, apart from a
writing that evidences its existence. For instance, the debt of another
that is evidenced by a promissory note is an intangible asset. The
intangible assets of a business include going concern value and good
will.
INTANGIBLE PROPERTY possessions that only represent real value,
such as stock certificates, bonds, promissory notes, franchises.
INTEGRATION 1. the process by which the parties to an agreement adopt
a writing or writings as the full and final expression of their agreement;
2. the writing or writings so adopted. 3. the bringing together of
different races.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY area of law concerning property, such as
ideas, creative works, or inventions of human intelligence (including
documents, symbols, and images) and the registration thereof (involving
copyright, trademark, and patent rights as well as the protection of trade
secrets). See also scène à faire.
INTENDMENT OF LAW the true meaning of or purpose behind a law.
INTENT a state of mind wherein the person knows and desires the
consequences of his or her act. For criminal and certain types of civil
liability, intent must exist at the time the offense is committed. See
animo; mens rea; scienter.
DONATIVE INTENT see gift [DONATIVE INTENT].
LEGISLATIVE INTENT that which the legislature desired when it enacted
legislation. The purpose behind a statute is important in determining the
meaning of the words in a statute. See legislative history. Compare
plain meaning.
LETTER OF INTENT see letter of intent.
ORIGINAL INTENT view that interpretation of the Constitution should be
confined to the words themselves and the meaning that those words
would have been given by the Founding Fathers themselves, not
contemporary interpretations. See strict construction.
TESTAMENTARY INTENT see testamentary intent.
TRANSFERRED INTENT see transferred intent.
INTENTIONAL INFLICTION OF EMOTIONAL DISTRESS see
emotional distress [INTENTIONAL INFLICTION OF EMOTIONAL DISTRESS].
INTER ALIA (ĭn’-teWr ä’-le@-aW) Lat.: among other things.
INTERCEPTION see wiretap.
INTEREST 1. in commercial law, consideration or compensation for the
use of money loaned or forbearance in demanding it when due; 2. in
legal practice, a term connoting bias or concern for the advantage or
disadvantage of a party to the action or of the subject matter of the
action. Interest affects the credibility of witnesses. Interest is required
for the intervention of third parties in a lawsuit and is also a ground for
disqualifying a judge or juror; 3. in real property, the broadest term
applicable to claims on real estate, including any right, title or estate in
or lien on real property. Interest thus refers to the legal concern of a
person in the property, or in the right to some of the benefits from which
the property is inseparable.
COMPOUND INTEREST interest that is paid not only upon the principal
sum, but also upon the interest previously paid on that sum. Thus,
interest already paid or accrued becomes part of the principal, for
purposes of subsequent interest calculations.
EXECUTED INTEREST an interest in property presently enjoyed and
possessed by a party.
EXECUTORY INTEREST interest in property that may become actual in the
future or upon the occurrence of some event.
INTEREST RATE the amount of interest paid, usually expressed as a
percentage of the amount of the underlying debt.
SHIFTING INTEREST a future interest arising in derogation of or out of a
preceding interest.
SPRINGING INTEREST a future interest arising from an estate in the
grantor. Compare chain of title.
VESTED INTEREST one in which there is a present fixed right of present
or future enjoyment. See also vested [VESTED INTEREST].
INTERIM FINANCING debt that is incurred on a short-term basis until
permanent financing can be arranged.
INTERIM ORDER a temporary order, made until another or FINAL ORDER
(see order) takes its place or a specific event occurs.
INTERLOCKING DIRECTORATE two or more boards of directors of
corporations that have one or more common members. Common control
of the corporations may result from interlocking directorates, and can be
used to restrict competition. Consequently, interlocking directorates are
subject to prohibition and regulation under the Clayton Antitrust Act.
INTERLOCUTORY provisional; temporary. An order or judgment that
does not determine the issues but directs further proceeding
preliminary to a final order or decree. Until final decree, an
interlocutory judgment is subject to change by the court to meet the
needs of the case and is often not appealable except by leave of court.
EXAMPLE: Fran wins a suppression motion to exclude certain evidence
against her in an upcoming trial. Before the trial begins, the prosecutor
seeks leave from the judge to file an interlocutory appeal from the
suppression order, rather than wait until the trial is concluded before
appealing the judge’s ruling on Fran’s motion. If the prosecutor’s
request is granted, Fran’s trial will not proceed until an appellate court
rules on the motion.
INTERLOCUTORY DECREE see decree [INTERLOCUTORY DECREES].
INTERLOCUTORY INJUNCTIONS see injunction [TEMPORARY
[INTERLOCUTORY] INJUNCTIONS].
INTERLOCUTORY ORDER order determining an intermediate issue,
made in the course of a pending litigation that does not dispose of the
case, but abides further court action resolving the entire controversy.
Such orders are not generally appealable until after the entire matter has
been disposed of by final order or judgment.
INTERLOCUTORY SENTENCE see sentence [INTERLOCUTORY
SENTENCE].
INTERMEDDLER see officious intermeddler.
INTERNAL REVENUE CODE the massive statute providing the
foundation for all federal tax law. This statute is located in Title 26,
United States Code. Its various subtitles include tax provisions relating
to the INCOME TAX, GIFT TAX and ESTATE TAX (now UNIFIED ESTATE AND
GIFT TAX), as well as other less important and less well-known taxes. As
with all federal statutes, it is enacted and amended by Congress, and is
implemented through the Internal Revenue Service by the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, appointed by the President.
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE [IRS] the federal agency primarily
concerned with the administration of the federal tax laws.
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS agreements between nations such as
treaties, conventions, and protocols.
INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE the principal tribunal of the
United Nations, consisting of 15 members elected by the General
Assembly and the Security Council for a definite, limited term. The
only appeal from a judgment of this Court is to the U.N. Security
Council. The seat of the Court is at the Hague, though it may meet
elsewhere at its discretion.
INTERNATIONAL LAW the law governing relations of nations with one
another, which arises principally from international agreements or from
customs that nations adopt.
In a broader sense, international law includes both public law and
private law. The public law regulates political relations between nations.
The private law is the comity nations grant to each other’s laws in
enforcing rights arising under foreign law.
INTER PARES (ĭn’-teWr pär’-a@s) Lat.: among peers; among those of equal
rank.
INTER PARTES (ĭn’-ter pär’-ta@s) Lat.: between the parties.
INTERPLEADER an equitable action in which a debtor, not knowing to
whom among his or her creditors a certain debt is owed, and having no
claim on the property in dispute, will petition a court to require the
creditors to litigate the claim among themselves. The person
interpleading is called the stakeholder. Interpleader is used to avoid
multiple liability on the part of the debtor and is used often by
insurance carriers, who deposit the proceeds of a policy in court where
several persons with conflicting rights have made claims.
EXAMPLE: An insurance company immediately realizes that an airline it
insures is responsible for a crash that has killed 20 people. The
company, by way of interpleader, is able to deposit with the court the
maximum liability for which the airline is insured for these 20 people
and thereby lets the families of each person and the court determine
how the money will be allocated.
Compare cross-claim; joinder.
INTERROGATION the process by which suspects are rigorously
questioned by police. See Miranda rule.
INTERROGATORIES in civil actions, a pretrial discovery tool in which
one party’s written questions are served on the adversary, who must
serve written replies under oath. Interrogatories can only be served on
parties to the action, and while not as flexible as depositions, which
include opportunity of cross-examination, they are regarded as a good
and inexpensive means of establishing important facts held by the
adversary.
IN TERROREM (ĭn te*-rô’-re*m) Lat.: in fear. A CONDITION SUBSEQUENT
(see condition) placed in a will or contract that, although
unenforceable, has the purpose of intimidating the beneficiary and
thereby perhaps securing his compliance.
INTER SE [INTER SESE] (ĭn’-teWr sa@, ĭn’-teWr se*’-sa@) Lat.: among or
between themselves; commonly applied to trust instruments to signify
that only the rights of shareholders and trustees are involved.
INTERSTATE COMMERCE business activity among inhabitants of
different states, including transportation of persons and property and
navigation of public waters for that purpose, as well as purchase, sale
and exchange of commodities.
INTERSTATE COMMERCE COMMISSION federal regulatory
agency concerned with interstate commerce in the transportation
industry (trucks, trains, and bus lines, but not airlines) as well as oil
pipelines. The ICC’s goal is for the industries to provide reasonable
rates and services. See commerce clause.
INTERSTATE COMPACT see compact clause [INTERSTATE COMPACT].
INTERVAL OWNERSHIP see time-sharing.
INTERVENING CAUSE [FORCE] see cause [INTERVENING
[SUPERVENING] CAUSE].
INTERVENTION a proceeding permitting a person to enter a lawsuit
already in progress; in civil law, admission of a person not an original
party to the suit, to protect a right or interest allegedly affected by the
proceedings. The INTERVENOR may wish to join the plaintiff or the
defendant or demand something adverse to both. A person generally
can become an intervenor only by proving he or she has an interest in
the subject matter of the original litigation. The purpose of intervention
is to prevent delay and unnecessary duplication of lawsuits; it may be
denied, however, if it interferes excessively with the rights of original
parties to conduct the suit on their own terms.
EXAMPLE: The Pope family sues Durable Paperboard Company for using
chemicals that contain carcinogens in phone repair products. Two other
companies use the same chemicals and fear that a decision adverse to
Durable will result in many lawsuits against them based on the same
claim. The companies therefore seek to intervene in the suit between the
family and Durable.
INTER VIVOS (ĭn’-teWr ve@’-vo@s) Lat.: between the living. Transactions
inter vivos are made while the parties are living, and not upon death (as
in inheritance) or upon contemplation of death (cause mortis). A deed,
therefore, is an instrument that conveys inter vivos a present interest
in land. Gifts are either inter vivos, causa mortis or by will.
INTESTATE [INTESTACY] the condition of having died without leaving
a valid will. An intestate estate is property that a decedent has failed to
dispose of (devise) by will.
INTESTATE SUCCESSION the disposition of property to heirs
according to the laws of descent and distribution upon the death of a
person who has left no will, or who has left a portion of his or her estate
unaccounted for in the will. See inheritance.
IN TOTO (ĭn to@’-to@) Lat.: in total.
INTOXICATION state of drunkenness, or a similar condition caused by
use of drugs other than alcohol.
INTRINSIC EVIDENCE part of the internal chain composing the process
of adjudication. Where allegations of fraud in the complaint attacking a
judgment in a former action were that false testimony was given, such
allegations of fraud concerned “intrinsic fraud” and thus res judicata
barred the complaint.
INTRINSIC FRAUD see fraud.
INTRUST see entrust.
INURE to take effect; to serve to the benefit of someone; in property, to
vest.
IN VACUO (ĭn vaWk’-u@-o@) Lat.: in space.
INVALID ON ITS FACE see void for vagueness.
INVASION OF PRIVACY the wrongful intrusion into a person’s private
activities by other individuals or by the government. See also due
process of law. See privacy, right of [INVASION OF PRIVACY];
wiretapping.
INVENTION see patent [PATENT OF INVENTION].
INVENTORY the category on a balance sheet reflecting the cost of goods
purchased by a business for future sale. Inventories are generally
required in every business in which the sale of merchandise is a material
income producing factor. To determine the gross profit from the
business operation involving the sale of merchandise, the taxpayer
reduces from gross receipts the cost of goods sold. To determine costs
of goods sold, the taxpayer adds the inventory on hand at the beginning
of the year to the cost of goods purchased during the year and subtracts
the inventory on hand at the close of the year. In general, there are two
methods available for determining the basis of inventory on hand at the
end of the year— LIFO and FIFO.
FIRST-IN, FIRST-OUT [FIFO] a method of inventory accounting in which the
goods sold during the year are assigned the cost of the goods purchased
earliest and the goods on hand at the end of the year are given the value
of the goods most recently purchased. The underlying assumption of
FIFO is that a business sells its inventory in the order in which it was
purchased, i.e., the items purchased first are sold first. During a period
of rapid inflation, FIFO will cause large profits to result, since the least
expensive goods, i.e., those purchased earliest, are considered sold. To
avoid the distortion of income that may result from FIFO, business may
change to the LAST-IN, FIRST-OUT method of inventory accounting.
LAST-IN, FIRST-OUT [LIFO] a method of inventory accounting under which
the goods sold during the year are assigned the cost of the goods most
recently purchased, and the goods on hand at the end of the year are
given the value of the goods purchased earliest. The underlying
assumption of LIFO is that a business sells its most recently purchased
goods first. During a period of inflation, LIFO tends to understate
profits since the most expensive goods, i.e., those most recently
purchased, are considered to be sold.
LOWER COST OR VALUE a method of valuing inventory in which the
goods on hand are valued at the lower of the price paid to purchase
them or their fair market value at the time of valuation.
IN VENTRE SA MERE (in ve*n’-tre@sä ma@r) Leg. Fr: in the mother’s
womb; an unborn child.
INVERSE ORDER OF ALIENATION see marshaling [marshalling]
[INVERSE ORDER OF ALIENATION].
INVEST to transfer capital to an enterprise in order to secure income or
profit for the investor.
INVESTIGATIVE DETENTION see detention [INVESTIGATIVE
DETENTION].
INVESTIGATORY POWERS the powers given to governmental agencies
and other entities to investigate violations of laws and to gather
information regarding laws that are proposed to be enacted.
INVESTITURE at common law, a ceremony demonstrating the transfer of
possession of land. An open and notorious livery of seisin or corporeal
possession in the presence of other vassals was essential to transfer land
in the system of feudal tenure. During the early English period, when
the art of writing was not widely known, this ceremony demonstrated
who had title in case title was disputed at a later time. Investitures were
probably first used in conquered countries to demonstrate the legitimate
possession of lands by the lord. See seisin.
INVESTMENT the purchase of property with the expectation of obtaining
income or capital gain in the future.
INVESTMENT BANKER a broker of stocks who acts as an
underwriter of securities. The investment banker can act as principal
by buying the entire issue from the selling corporation or from selling
shareholders, or as agent by selling the offering on a “best-efforts”
basis. In either event the investment banker sells the issue to other
dealers who together with the lead banker have formed an underwriting
syndicate. Members of the syndicate in turn sell the shares to the
investing public and to institutional investors such as pension funds (see
retirement plan) or mutual funds. Investment banking is not banking
as generally defined, and investment banking activities are illegal for
commercial banks.
INVESTMENT COMPANY ACT OF 1940 see Securities Acts
[INVESTMENT COMPANY ACT OF 1940].
INVESTMENT COMPANY [TRUST] a company or trust formed to pool
the money resources of many individual investors in a large fund
offering potential for investment diversification and professional
management. Such a corporation typically invests in real estate or
stocks and bonds, distributing the profit therefrom to its shareholders in
the form of dividends.
INVESTMENT STOCK see restricted securities [INVESTMENT STOCK].
INVESTMENT TAX CREDIT see tax credit [INVESTMENT TAX CREDIT].
INVESTORS ADVISORS ACT OF 1940 see Securities Acts [INVESTORS
ADVISORS ACT OF 1940].
INVIDIOUS causing resentment or ill will; discriminatory.
INVITEE one who comes upon private land by the owner’s invitation,
whether express or implied. In tort law, the owner is not an insurer of
the safety of invitees, but he or she owes a duty to them to exercise
reasonable care for their protection against latent defects in the
premises that might cause them injury. Compare licensee; trespass.
EXAMPLE: Marcos has a vacation home in a wooded area where he lays
traps to catch animals. He invites neighbors to take a walk with him in
some of the back parts of the property to enjoy the scenic view. One of
these invitees steps on a trap that was buried below the ground and
injures his foot. Marcos is responsible for the invitee’s injuries.
BUSINESS INVITEE [GUEST] one who is invited to enter onto another’s
land or premises for the purpose of doing business. The person who
invites the business invitee onto the property has a high duty of care
with regard to the business invitee and must take reasonable care to
protect the invitee against injury.
INVOLUNTARY unwilling; forced; opposed; in criminal law, can act as a
defense to a charge of committing a crime. See duress.
EXAMPLE: Bernice is forced at gunpoint to accompany several men into a
bank to aid them in a robbery. Since her actions are involuntary and
performed under duress, she cannot be charged with criminal
responsibility in the crime.
INVOLUNTARY COMMITMENT see commitment [INVOLUNTARY].
INVOLUNTARY CONFESSION a confession to a crime obtained in violation
of the defendant’s right against self-incrimination under the Fifth
Amendment. Such confessions can never be used at trial, and their use
results in reversal of any subsequent conviction.
INVOLUNTARY CONVERSION the conversion of property into money or
similar property as a result of its destruction in whole or in part by theft,
seizure, requisition, condemnation or threat thereof. For income tax
purposes, gain is not recognized on property that is involuntarily
converted, if the taxpayer acquires property similar in service or use
within two years of the loss.
INVOLUNTARY DISSOLUTION see dissolution [INVOLUNTARY
DISSOLUTION].
INVOLUNTARY BAILMENT see bailment [INVOLUNTARY BAILMENT].
INVOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER see manslaughter [INVOL-UNTARY
MANSLAUGHTER].
INVOLUNTARY NONSUIT see nonsuit [INVOLUNTARY NONSUIT].
INVOLUNTARY SERVITUDE forced labor or services, whether or not
for pay, that are performed or provided by another person and are
obtained or maintained through an actor’s threat (either implicit or
explicit), scheme, plan, or pattern, or other action intended to cause a
person to believe that, if the person did not perform or provide the labor
or services, that person or another person would suffer bodily harm or
physical restraint; physically restraining or threatening to physically
restrain a person; abuse or threatened abuse of the legal process;
knowingly destroying, concealing, removing, confiscating, or
possessing any actual or purported passport or other immigration
document, or any other actual or purported government identification
document, of another person; or blackmail. It includes forced
prostitution or sexual services, domestic servitude, bonded sweatshop
labor, or other debt bondage. See also trafficking [HUMAN
TRAFFICKING].
INVOLUNTARY TRUST see trust [CONSTRUCTIVE [INVOLUNTARY]
TRUST].
IOLTA acronym for Interest on Lawyers’ Trust Accounts. Program in some
states where lawyers holding funds belonging to clients, which are too
small or short-term for an individual interest-bearing account, deposit
such funds into a special bank account containing similar funds from
other lawyers. The interest generated from the pooled account helps
fund legal programs for the needy.
IPSE DIXIT (ĭp’-sa@dĭks’-ĭt) Lat.: he himself said it. Refers to an assertion
the sole authority for which is that the speaker has said it.
IPSO FACTO (ĭp’-so@fa*k’-too@) Lat.: by the fact itself; in and of itself.
IPSO JURE (ĭp’-so@ju@’-ra@) Lat.: by the law itself; merely by the law.
IRA see Individual Retirement Account.
IRB [INDUSTRIAL RESERVE BOND] see guaranteed security. Also,
Individual Retirement Bond.
IRC see Internal Revenue Code.
IRREFRAGABLE indisputable, not to be refuted or denied.
IRREGULAR RENDITION see rendition.
IRRELEVANT immaterial; not relevant; generally used in the context of
a rule of evidence, whereby one party objects to the introduction at trial
of evidence that is not connected to the issue being decided.
IRREPARABLE INJURY [DAMAGE; HARM] a type of injury for
which no remedy at law (damages) suffices, and that thus requires a
court of equity to intervene, often by issuing an injunction to prevent
the conduct or conditions that are causing or threatening the injury. In
fact, showing of imminent irreparable injury is ordinarily prerequisite to
a request for an injunction.
IRRESISTIBLE IMPULSE TEST see insanity [IRRESISTIBLE IMPULSE
TEST].
IRS see Internal Revenue Service.
ISSUE 1. as a verb, to put into circulation, as to a buyer. 2. In corporation
law, a STOCK ISSUE is the process by which a corporation authorizes,
executes and delivers shares of stock for sale to the public. The term
also describes the shares offered by the corporation at a particular time.
3. in the law of real property, the noun issue means descendants.
EXAMPLE: Latonya’s will declared that any part of her estate not
specifically distributed to someone else be divided among her issue. Her
children tried to claim the full amount of this residual property, but, as
the children were reminded by the court in a lawsuit against them,
“issue” refers to all descendants, including children, grandchildren and
other more remote descendants.
4. in legal practice, a point of fact or law disputed between parties to
the litigation, generally an assertion by one side and a denial by the
other.
ISSUED see when issued.
ISSUE PRECLUSION the rendering of a decision that precludes the issue
decided from being relitigated. See collateral estoppel; res judicata.
ITEMIZED DEDUCTIONS see deductions [ITEMIZED DEDUCTIONS].
J
J. abbreviation for a judge or justice. Other abbreviations include A.J.,
Associate Judge/Justice; C.J., Chief Judge/Justice; J.A.G., Judge Advocate
General; JJ., Judges/Justices; J.P., Justice of the Peace; L.J., Law Judge;
P.J., Presiding Judge.
JAG abbreviation for Judge Advocate General; a designation used in
military justice.
JAIL place used for the detention of persons in the lawful custody of the
government, such as a person accused of a crime who is held for trial,
or a person convicted of a crime who is serving a sentence. If the
inmate is confined in a local police station, it is generally referred to as
a LOCK-UP; if temporarily confined in a courthouse during a trial, it is
generally called a HOLDING CELL; if confined in a county facility for a
period of 18 months or less, it is often called a WORKHOUSE. Most longterm confinement is now held in a CORRECTIONAL FACILITY such as the
Federal Correctional Institution at [particular place]. These are referred
to as FCI at [place]. Older usage called such long-term confinement
facilities PRISONS or PENITENTIARIES. See penal institution.
JAILHOUSE LAWYER inmate who, through self-study of law, assists
fellow inmates in the preparation of their appeals but does not possess
formal training and is not licensed to practice law. Reliance upon
jailhouse lawyers is often the only means by which indigent prisoners
can be assured of access to the courts. Thus, the use of such assistance
has been declared to be constitutionally protected.
J.D. Juris Doctor. Degree awarded today upon completion of formal legal
studies by most American law schools. The degree was formerly
designated LL.B.
JENCKS ACT [RULE] a statute entitling a criminal defendant in a
federal prosecution to discover any witness statement against him or
her that is relevant to the witness’s testimony and that is in the
possession of the United States government. It was enacted after the
U.S. Supreme Court held that defendants were entitled to such material.
Since the Act restricts the defendant’s access to such material until after
the witness has testified in court, pretrial discovery of such material is
not permitted. Testimony of a grand jury witness is specifically
included in the definition of “statement” by virtue of a later-enacted
amendment to the Act.
JEOPARDY the danger of conviction and punishment in which a person is
placed when he or she is put on trial for a criminal offense. See double
jeopardy.
JEOPARDY ASSESSMENT see assessment of deficiency [JEOPARDY
ASSESSMENT].
JJ. abbreviation for judges or justices.
JOBBER a middleman in the sale of goods; one who buys from a
wholesaler and sells to a retailer. A jobber, who actually purchases
goods himself or herself and then resells them, is distinguished from a
broker or agent, who sells goods on another’s behalf.
JOBS CREDIT see tax credit [TARGETED JOBS CREDIT].
JOHN/JANE DOE fictional names used to identify persons in a
hypothetical situation in order to explain an issue; name used when a
person refuses to identify himself or herself or when a person cannot be
identified.
JOINDER uniting of several causes of action or parties in a single suit. In
federal practice, a party may join as many claims as he or she has
against the opposing party. Compare class action; impleader;
misjoinder.
COMPULSORY JOINDER mandatory joining of a person needed in an
action for a just adjudication of the controversy. All related claims
against another must be joined, or the claimant faces the possibility of
being barred from litigating claims separately on the grounds that such
action constitutes multiplicity of suits. A defendant must raise related
claims as compulsory counterclaims.
JOINDER OF ACTIONS OR CLAIMS the joinder of two or more claims or
actions in a single lawsuit. See PERMISSIVE JOINDER (below).
JOINDER OF ISSUE the act by which an issue is formally fashioned and
structured for the purpose of its consideration and determination by a
court. Under the code system of pleading, an issue is joined when one
side asserts a set of facts and the other side denies it. In criminal law
joinder of issue occurs when the defendant pleads “not guilty” in
response to an indictment filed against him or her.
JOINDER OF PARTIES the naming of a person or entity as a party to a
lawsuit. See COMPULSORY JOINDER (above) and PERMISSIVE JOINDER
(below).
MISJOINDER the improper joinder of a party or a claim. In civil cases, the
remedy is to remove the improper party or claim from the suit. In
criminal cases, the remedy is a separate trial of the misjoinder offenses
or defendants.. This remedy is also available to criminal defendants if
the misjoinder prejudices any of the defendants. See misjoinder.
PERMISSIVE JOINDER the joining of persons, so that in a single lawsuit a
plaintiff may raise all his or her unrelated claims against another party
with the court severing claims that ought not be tried together. A
defendant may plead in his or her answer any PERMISSIVE
COUNTERCLAIMS against the plaintiff.
JOINDER OF ISSUE the act by which an issue is formally structured for
its determination by a court.
JOINT a common as opposed to individual interest or liability.
JOINT ACCOUNT a bank account belonging to two or more persons,
with funds in JOINT TENANCY (see tenancy).
JOINT AND SEVERAL refers to the sharing of rights and liabilities
among a group of persons collectively and also individually. Thus, if
defendants in a negligence suit are jointly and severally liable, all may
be sued together or any one may be sued for satisfaction to the injured
party.
EXAMPLE: Emma is injured when a bottle of soda she purchased at a store
explodes. She sues both the owner of the store and the manufacturer of
the soda. If they are both found liable, their liability will probably be
joint and several. Emma may choose to collect her entire damage award
from one of the parties or may apportion the total owed to her between
the two defendants in any manner she chooses.
See contribution; indemnity. Compare severally.
JOINT CUSTODY see custody of children.
JOINT ENTERPRISE undertaking founded on mutual agreement of
parties; essential elements are agreement, common purpose, community
of interest and equal right of control. Those who engage in a joint
enterprise that is unlawful or causes injury may be liable as joint
tortfeasors, accessories or conspirators.
JOINT LIABILITY shared liability that allows a sued person the right to
insist that others be sued jointly with him.
JOINT LIVES a period that lasts until the death of the last to survive of
two or more specified persons.
JOINT OWNERSHIP see joint tenancy [ownership].
JOINT RETURN see return, income tax [JOINT RETURN].
JOINT STOCK COMPANY see company [JOINT STOCK COMPANY].
JOINT TENANCY [OWNERSHIP] an interest in property consisting of
a single estate in land or other property owned by two or more persons,
created by the same grantor or grantors under one instrument and, at
one time, with all such persons having an equal right to share in the use
and enjoyment of the property during their respective lives and being
entitled to the full ownership of such property upon the death of each
other such person. The property can be conveyed by a deed joined in by
all the co-tenants or by a forced judicial partition. See survivorship;
unities.
JOINT TORTFEASORS two or more persons who owe to another person
the same duty and whose negligence results in injury to such other
person, thereby rendering the tortfeasors both jointly and severally
[individually] liable for the injury. To be liable as joint tortfeasors, the
parties either must act in concert or must by independent acts cause a
single injury.
EXAMPLE: Two friends practice their hunting skills on a reservation that
does not permit hunting. A hiker is injured by a stray bullet from one of
the friend’s guns. Since it cannot be determined which friend shot the
bullet that injured the hiker, both friends are liable for the injury as joint
tortfeasors.
See contribution. Compare conspiracy.
JOINTURE an estate or property secured to a prospective wife as a
marriage settlement, to be enjoyed by her after her husband’s decease.
The estate existed under the common law as a means of protecting the
wife’s future, upon the death of her husband, in place of dower.
JOINT VENTURE a business undertaking by two or more parties in
which profits, losses and control are shared. Though the term is often
synonymous with partnership, a joint venture may indicate an
enterprise of more limited scope and duration, though there is the same
mutual liability of the participants for debts and torts of the venture.
EXAMPLE: Several business associates develop a new method of
marketing pet food. A joint venture is established, limiting business
activity to the marketing scheme and obliging each associate to
contribute enough money for the new company to last one year. If the
company is not successful by that time, any remaining money will be
distributed to the associates and the venture will be dissolved.
JONES ACT the federal statute that gives a sailor who suffers a personal
injury in the course of employment, or the personal representative of a
sailor who dies as the result of a personal injury suffered in the course
of employment, the right to sue for damages at law. A federal statute
provides that all statutes modifying or extending the common law right
or remedy in cases of personal injury to railway employees shall apply
to sailors. See also Federal Employers Liability Act.
JOURNALIST’S [NEWSPERSON’S] PRIVILEGE some states have
enacted shield laws granting media persons the privilege of declining to
reveal confidential sources of information. No constitutional basis for
such a privilege has been found in the First Amendment’s guarantee of
freedom of the press. Such a privilege, however, must yield to a
defendant’s need for discovery and for a fair trial as constitutionally
granted under the Sixth Amendment and similarly must yield in any
circumstance where the interests of justice so require. However,
disclosure can only be required if relevant to issues at trial.
JOYRIDING the illegal taking of an automobile for the purpose of using if
for a short period of time. Joyriding is a specific offense, usually lesser
in degree than larceny, and is in many states punishable by fines and/or
imprisonment. In other states, it is one of many acts that may constitute
the more serious crime of larceny.
J.P. abbreviation for Justice of the Peace.
JUDGE one who conducts trials or presides over a court of justice. Judges
determine controversies between parties based upon evidence and legal
argument presented. They are not investigators or advisors.
JUDGE-MADE LAW law made in the common law tradition; law arrived
at by judicial precedent rather than by statute.
JUDGMENT the determination of a court of competent jurisdiction upon
matters submitted to it; a final determination of the rights of the parties
to a lawsuit. See recall a judgment; warrant [WARRANT TO SATISFY
JUDGMENT]. Legal circles favor the spelling as judgment instead of
judgement.
COGNOVIT JUDGMENT see confession of judgment.
CONFESSION OF JUDGMENT see confession of judgment.
DEFAULT JUDGMENT a judgment entered on behalf of a plaintiff when the
defendant defaults, or fails to appear in the proceeding. See default
judgment.
ERRONEOUS JUDGMENT see erroneous [ERRONEOUS JUDGMENT].
ESTOPPEL BY JUDGMENT estoppel brought about by the judgment of a
court because a similar question or fact in dispute has been determined
by a court of competent jurisdiction between the same parties or their
privies.
FINAL JUDGMENT a conclusive determination of the rights of the parties,
disposing of the entire controversy before the court, or of some
separable portion of the dispute, so that immediately after the judgment,
or an appeal therefrom, the enforcement of that judgment can be made.
The term also refers to the sentence imposed in a criminal case. See
final decision.
JUDGMENT BY DEFAULT see default; default judgment.
JUDGMENT IN PERSONAM see PERSONAL JUDGMENT (below).
JUDGMENT IN REM one pronounced upon the status of a particular
subject matter, property or thing, as opposed to one pronounced upon
persons.
JUDGMENT N.O.V. see n.o.v.
JUDGMENT OF CONVICTION the sentence in a criminal case formally
entered in the clerk’s records.
JUDGMENT OF DISMISSAL an order that finally disposes of a matter
without a trial of the issues involved on their merits. See dismissal.
JUDGMENT ON THE MERITS a binding judgment determined by analysis
and adjudication of the factual issues presented, rather than by the
existence of a technical or procedural defect that requires one party to
prevail.
EXAMPLE: Robin files a lawsuit but inadvertently names the wrong
parties as defendants. When her case comes to trial, it may be dismissed
as against the people she wanted to sue because they were not named.
That dismissal would not be a judgment on the merits, since the court’s
action in doing so is necessitated by a procedural error committed by
Robin.
JUDGMENT ON THE PLEADINGS see SUMMARY JUDGMENT (below).
PERSONAL JUDGMENT a judgment rendered against an individual or an
entity such as a corporation for the payment of money damages. To be
distinguished from a JUDGMENT IN REM (above). See in personam;
personal judgment.
SUMMARY JUDGMENT a pre-verdict judgment rendered by the court on
the basis of the pleadings because no material issue of fact exists and
one party or the other is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Either
party may move for summary judgment at any time after all pleadings
have been filed. See summary judgment.
JUDGMENT CREDITOR a creditor who has obtained against a debtor a
judgment through which the creditor can obtain the sum due him or
her. The effect of becoming a judgment creditor is to create against
other creditors a certain priority right to have the debt satisfied out of
the debtor’s assets, and to extend the life of the claim under the statute
of limitations so that the judgment debt may be sued upon for a longer
period than would be possible for a debt without a judgment.
JUDGMENT DEBTOR a person against whom there is a legal judgment
for repayment of a debt. The effect of becoming a judgment debtor is
that the debtor’s property may be subject to creditor’s claims. See
creditor’s bill; garnishment; lien; sheriff’s sale; writ of execution.
Compare bankruptcy; judgment creditor.
JUDGMENT PROOF a person who lacks the financial resources
necessary to satisfy a judgment for damages or whose wages or
property is protected from judicial attachment by law.
JUDICATURE see judiciary.
JUDICIAL ACTIVISM the theory of judicial behavior that advocates
basing decisions not on the judicial precedent but on achieving what
the court perceives to be for the public welfare, or what the court
determines to be fair and just on the facts before it. Compare judicial
restraint.
JUDICIAL ADMISSION see stipulation.
JUDICIAL DISCRETION see discretion.
JUDICIAL ECONOMY the most efficient use of judicial resources; often
used as the rationale underlying doctrines in civil procedure such as
permissive joinder or res judicata, and sometimes offered as the
justification for a judge’s decision in a particular case.
JUDICIAL IMMUNITY the immunity of a judge from civil liability for
any acts performed in the judge’s official capacity. The immunity is
absolute provided only that the judge is acting within his or her
jurisdiction. The scope of the judge’s jurisdiction must be construed
broadly to protect the court’s independence; therefore, the judge will not
be deprived of immunity because the action taken was in error, was
done maliciously, or was in excess of the judge’s authority; rather, the
judge will be subject to liability only when the action taken was in clear
absence of all jurisdiction. Where the relief sought is injunctive or
declaratory and not money damages, immunity is not provided under
the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and state courts may be sued for such
relief.
JUDICIAL NOTICE the court’s recognition of facts that can be confirmed
by consulting sources of unquestioned accuracy, thus removing the
burden of producing evidence to prove these facts. A court can admit
facts that are common knowledge to an average, well-informed citizen.
EXAMPLE: Kristen claims that on the day of the accident the roads were
very slick as a result of a torrential downpour. However, the victim of
the accident brings in several weather maps and reports showing that for
seven days prior to and including the day of the accident, there was not
a single raindrop. A court can take judicial notice of the maps and
reports.
JUDICIAL RESTRAINT the theory of judicial behavior that advocates
basing decisions on grounds that have been previously defined by
judicial precedent rather than on the basis of achieving some public
good, which is viewed as the proper role of the legislature. Compare
judicial activism.
JUDICIAL REVIEW the review by a court of law of some act, or failure
to act, by a government official or entity, or by some other legally
appointed person or organized body; the review of the decision of a
trial court by an appellate court.
In a constitutional law context, judicial review expresses the concept
first articulated in Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137 (1803)
that it is “the province and the duty of the judicial department to say
what the law is.” Under this doctrine the U.S. Supreme Court and the
highest courts of every state have assumed the power and responsibility
to decide the constitutionality of the acts of the legislative and executive
branches of their respective jurisdictions.
JUDICIAL SALE see sale [FORCED SALE]; sheriff’s sale [judicial sale].
JUDICIARY that department of government established to interpret and
administer the law. The courts and all those connected with the practice
of law.
JUMP BAIL colloquial expression meaning to leave the jurisdiction or to
avoid appearance as a defendant in a criminal trial after bail has been
posted, thus causing a forfeiture of bail: to abscond after the posting of
bail. See flight.
JUMP CITATION see pinpoint citation.
JURAL of or pertaining to law or justice.
JURAT (ju@r’-ät) Lat.: has been sworn. The clause at the end of an affidavit
with the date, location and person before whom the statement was
sworn.
JURE UXORIS (jû’-re@u@-xo@-rĭs) Lat.: right of the wife.
JURIS (jûr’-ĭs) Lat.: of law.
JURISDICTION 1. power to hear and determine a case; may be
established and described with reference to a particular subject or to
parties in a particular category. In addition to power to adjudicate, a
valid exercise of jurisdiction requires fair notice and opportunity for
affected parties to be heard. 2. the geographic or political entity
governed by a particular legal system or body of laws. The word
“jurisdiction” is also used to refer to particular legal systems, as in “the
law varies in different jurisdictions,” and in the sense of territory
(coupled with authority to reach conduct within the territory), as in
“within the jurisdiction of X state.”
APPELLATE JURISDICTION the power vested in a superior tribunal to
correct legal errors of inferior tribunals and to revise their judgments
accordingly.
CONCURRENT JURISDICTION equal jurisdiction; jurisdiction exercisable
by different courts at the same time, over the same subject matter and
within the same territory, so that litigants may, in the first instance,
resort to either court.
DIVERSITY JURISDICTION jurisdiction that federal courts have when the
opposing parties are from different states.
IN PERSONAM JURISDICTION jurisdiction over the person of the
defendant; necessary where the action is in personam.
SUBJECT MATTER JURISDICTION the competency of the court to hear and
determine a particular category of cases.
See ancillary jurisdiction; federal question jurisdiction; limited
jurisdiction; original jurisdiction; pendent jurisdiction; territorial
jurisdiction; title jurisdiction.
JURISDICTIONAL AMOUNT the minimum value a lawsuit must have
for certain courts to have jurisdiction to hear the case. The method of
determining the jurisdictional amount may vary with the nature of the
case; it may be the amount of damages claimed, money demanded, the
value of property in disputed ownership, or the value of a claimed
right. In some classes of federal cases, for example, a minimum amount
of $10,000 must be in controversy to confer jurisdiction on the federal
courts.
JURIS DOCTOR see J.D.
JURIS IGNORANTIA EST CUM NOSTRUM IGNORAMUS (jû’-rĭs
ĭg-no@-rän’-she@-a@e*st ku@m no@s’-tru*m ĭg-no@-rä’-mu@s) Lat.: it is ignorance
of the law when we are unfamiliar with our own rights.
JURISPRUDENCE 1. the science of law; the study of the structure of
legal systems, such as equity, and of the principles underlying that
system; 2. a collective term denoting the course of judicial decision, i.e.,
case law, as opposed to legislation; 3. sometimes a synonym for law.
JURIST 1. a legal scholar; one versed in law, particularly the civil law or
the law of nations; 2. a judge.
JUROR 1. person sworn as member of a jury; 2. person selected for jury
duty, but not yet chosen for a particular case.
JURY a group, composed of the peers of the parties or a cross section of
the community, summoned and sworn to decide on the facts in issue at a
trial.
BLUE RIBBON JURY a jury that was chosen from prominent members of
the community, such as well-educated persons or persons in positions of
high responsibility, thought to be particularly well qualified to serve as
jurors. These juries were used for certain highly publicized cases where
ordinary juries were thought to be too influenced to judge impartially.
Such special juries raised serious constitutional questions of the right to
trial by a jury of one’s peers and so are no longer used.
EXAMPLE: The murder of a beautiful actress made headlines and
television reports across the nation. When someone was finally arrested
for the crime, a blue ribbon jury was chosen from among bankers,
doctors and leaders of the business community. These people were
selected for their perceived ability to separate the news stories from the
facts they would hear at trial.
DE FACTO JURY see de facto [DE FACTO JURY].
GRAND JURY a jury to determine whether the facts and accusations
presented by the prosecutor warrant an indictment and eventual trial of
the accused; called grand because of the relatively large number of
jurors impaneled (traditionally 23) as compared with a PETIT JURY.
JURY OF THE VICINAGE literally, a jury from the neighborhood where a
crime was committed; a jury of peers. See vicinage.
JURY NULLIFICATION see nullification.
PETIT [PETTY] JURY ordinary trial jury, whose function is to determine
issues of fact in civil and criminal cases and to reach a verdict in
conjunction with those findings. While the number of jurors has
historically been twelve, many states now permit six-member juries in
civil cases, and some states permit six-member juries to hear criminal
cases as well.
POLLING THE JURY the practice of a judge asking each individual juror
his or her decision on the verdict which has been rendered. The polling
of the jury usually takes place at the request of a criminal defendant
who has been convicted or a party to a civil suit who has lost, and
occurs after the foreman of the jury has announced the verdict of the
jury.
See evidence; hung jury.
JURY TRIAL the trial of an issue of fact before a jury. The parties to the
action present their evidence to the jury. The judge then instructs the
jury as to how the law applies to their findings of fact. The jury
deliberates and renders its verdict. The Sixth Amendment to the
Federal Constitution guarantees a jury trial to those accused of crime.
JURY VOIR DIRE see voir dire.
JUS ACCRESCENDI (ju@s aW-kre*-se*n’-dῑ) Lat.: right of survivorship. See
joint tenancy [OWNERSHIP].
JUST COMPENSATION full indemnity for the loss or damage sustained
by the owner of property taken or injured under the power of eminent
domain. The measure generally used is the fair market value of the
property at the time of taking.
JUST DESERTS see desert [JUST DESERTS]
JUS TERTII (yu@s te*r’-she@-ῑ) Lat.: the right of a third; the legal right of a
third. The term often appears in the context of actions involving claims
of title to real property, where it is said that because a possessor’s title
is good against all the world except those with a better title, one seeking
to oust a possessor must do so on the strength of his or her own title,
and may not rely on a jus tertii, or the better title held by a third party.
JUSTICE a judge. Often the formal title of a judge of a high court, such as
the nine Justices of the United States Supreme Court. In New York,
however, justices are trial judges in the trial courts (which are called the
Supreme Court) and judges are in the highest court (the Court of
Appeals).
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE judgments by legal processes; the handing
out of punishment or reward; the application of law in a manner that is
right and equitable.
SYSTEM OF JUSTICE societal method of applying the laws evenly such
that all persons are treated fairly and receive the same rights. A standard
of conduct holding persons to their legal and moral obligations to
others.
JUSTICE OF THE PEACE a judicial officer of inferior rank, who
presides in a court of statutorily limited civil jurisdiction and who is
also a conservator of the peace with limited jurisdiction in criminal
proceedings, prosecutions, and commitment of offenders, as fixed by
statute.
JUSTICIABLE 1. capable of being tried in a court of law or equity; 2.
feasible for a court to carry out and enforce its decision, as opposed to
having jurisdiction—the authority to hear a case. A court can have
jurisdiction, but at the same time have a nonjusticiable issue before it.
EXAMPLE: A governor is required by law to extradite a person sought by
another state when that state institutes proper legal proceedings. Still,
the governor may decide not to extradite if, for example, he or she sees
an obvious life-threatening situation should the person be returned to
the state seeking him or her. In such instances, a court will usually deem
the failure to extradite as a nonjusticiable controversy and will take no
action to force the governor to extradite.
JUSTICIABLE CONTROVERSY a real controversy appropriate for judicial
determination, as distinguished from a hypothetical dispute; a dispute
that involves legal relations of parties who have real adverse interests,
and upon whom judgment may effectively operate through a
conclusive decree.
JUSTIFIABLE HOMICIDE see homicide.
JUSTIFICATION 1. just and lawful cause or excuse; 2. showing in court
sufficient reason the defendant did what he or she is called upon to
answer to, so as to excuse liability.
JUVENILE COURTS tribunals designed to treat youthful offenders
separately from adults. The purpose of this has been to place the state,
through the presiding judge, in the position of parens patriae, to
replace the adversary nature of normal proceedings with paternal
concern for the child’s well-being.
JUVENILE DELINQUENT a minor who has committed an offense
ordinarily punishable by criminal processes, but who is under the age,
set by statute, for criminal responsibility. When a juvenile commits an
offense it is considered an act of JUVENILE DELINQUENCY. See juvenile
courts.
K
K abbreviation for contract.
KANGAROO COURTa court that has no legal authority and that
disregards all the rights normally afforded to persons; its conclusions
are not legally binding. This is a slang term referring to a court that is
biased against a party and thus renders an unfair verdict or judgment.
KEOGH PLAN see retirement plans [KEOGH PLANS].
KEY ENCRYPTION see digital certificate.
KEY NUMBERS a numbering system used by the West Publishing
Company in their publications to break down legal research into
manageable topic areas with subcategories. It is a quick and useful
method of finding cases pertaining to a given subject.
KICKBACK the practice of a seller of goods or services paying the
purchasing agent of those goods or services a portion of the purchase
price in order to induce the agent to enter into the transaction. In the
context of public officials, purchasing goods or services for a
government entity, kickbacks are plainly illegal, since they cause the
official to act in his or her own, not the public’s, interest. In most
commercial contexts, they are illegal and prohibited by criminal
commercial bribery statutes. The principal of the purchasing agent
may also have a cause of action against the agent to recover the amount
of the bribery. For tax purposes, amounts paid as kickbacks or bribes
generally are not deductible.
KIDNAPPING unlawful carrying away of a person against his or her will;
false imprisonment coupled with removal of the victim to another
place. Kidnapping was only a misdemeanor in common law, but is a
serious felony in the United States. Compare abduction. See ransom.
KIN [KINSHIP] see consanguinity.
KIND see in kind.
KIND ARBITRAGE see arbitrage [KIND ARBITRAGE].
KING’S [QUEEN’S] BENCH Court of King’s Bench or Court of Queen’s
Bench (depending on the reigning monarch); the highest English
common law court, both civil and criminal, so called because the king
or queen formerly presided; now known as the King’s Bench or Queen’s
Bench Division of the High Court of Justice, embracing the jurisdiction
of the former Courts of Exchequer and Courts of Common Pleas.
KITING see check kiting.
KNOWINGLY see mens rea.
KORAN Islamic holy book considered by Muslims to be the source of
Islamic law. Often spelled Quran.
L
LABOR-MANAGEMENT RELATIONS ACT see Taft-Hartley Act.
LABOR ORGANIZATION [UNION] any association of workers whose
main purpose is to bargain on behalf of workers with employers about
the terms and conditions of employment including grievances, labor
disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of employment, or conditions of
work.
In England, unions were originally indictable as criminal
conspiracies. When statutes were enacted freeing them from this
criminal liability they were still condemned by the courts as being
organizations in restraint of trade, and therefore not deserving legal
enforcement of their rights, an attitude that persisted for some time in
the United States. Today, labor unions are recognized in full by the law
and are subject to regulation by the federal government under the
National Labor Relations Act. See also closed shop; union shop.
Compare cooperative association.
LABOR PRACTICE see unfair labor practice.
LABOR TRAFFICKING see trafficking [HUMAN TRAFFICKING].
LACHES a doctrine providing a party an EQUITABLE DEFENSE (see
defense) where long-neglected rights are sought to be enforced against
him or her. Laches signifies an undue lapse of time in enforcing a right
of action, and negligence in failing to act more promptly. It recognizes
that on account of the delay the defendant’s ability to defend may be
unfairly impaired because witnesses or evidence may have become
unavailable or been lost. The doctrine also recognizes that if the delay
has led the adverse party to change his or her position as to the
property or right in question, it is inequitable to allow the negligent
delaying party to be preferred in his or her legal right. The consequent
barring of the negligent party’s action is a kind of equitable estoppel
known as ESTOPPEL BY LACHES.
EXAMPLE: Believing that he had good title to property, Kareem constructs
an office building and fully rents it out. George watches Kareem
construct the building and waits an additional ten years before asserting
an ownership interest in the property. A court might apply the doctrine
of laches and bar George’s claim for two reasons. George was aware of
the construction and took no action until the building was completed, a
point at which Kareem had invested a considerable amount of money.
Also, George took an inordinate amount of time to raise his claim.
LADING, BILL OF see bill of lading.
LAME DUCK an elected official who has not been reelected but who
continues to serve until his or her present term of office expires.
LAND 1. real estate or real property, or any tract that may be conveyed
by deed. 2. an estate or interest in real property; often refers not only to
the earth itself but also to things of a permanent nature found or affixed
there. See grant [LAND GRANT]; run with the land; tide land.
LANDLORD one who leases real property. See lease.
LANDLORD’S LIEN see lien [LANDLORD’S LIEN].
LANDMARK CASE [DECISION] legal decision of great magnitude. A
precedent-setting decision. A case such as Miranda v. Arizona, 384
U.S. 436 (1966) was a landmark case in the area of the rights of
criminal suspects and led to the requirement that police give “Miranda
rights” to a suspect before taking a statement. See Miranda rule
[warnings].
LANDRUM-GRIFFIN ACT officially known as the Labor-Management
Reporting and Disclosure Act, it created broad reporting and disclosure
provisions to eliminate or prevent improper practices on the part of
labor organizations, employers, labor relation consultants, their officers
and representatives.
LAND TRUST also called an ILLINOIS LAND TRUST. This device vests title
to real property in the name of a trustee under a recorded deed of trust
while a second unrecorded agreement between the trustee and the
beneficiaries declares the trustee to be vested with full legal and
equitable title subject to certain specified rights of the beneficiaries that
are declared to be personal property of the beneficiaries.
LANHAM ACT see trademark [LANHAM ACT].
LAPSE to expire. Generally refers to termination of a right or privilege
that can no longer be exercised because of a particular contingency or
the passage of time. See antilapse statutes.
EXAMPLE: Ethel signs a 30-day option to purchase a home. That option
gives her the exclusive right to purchase the home within 30 days. If 30
days expire and Ethel does not purchase the house, the option lapses.
LARCENY the felonious taking and carrying away of the personal
property of another, without his or her consent, by a person not entitled
to possession, with intent to deprive the owner of the property and to
convert it to the use of the taker or another person other than the owner.
Larceny is sometimes classified as either GRAND LARCENY or PETIT
[PETTY] LARCENY, according to the value of the property taken or the
method employed. Compare burglary; embezzlement; robbery.
LAST ANTECEDENT DOCTRINE in statutory construction, the
doctrine under which relative or modifying phrases are to be applied
only to words immediately preceding them, and are not to be construed
as extending to more remote phrases unless this is clearly required by
the context of the statute or the reading of it as a whole.
LAST CLEAR CHANCE the doctrine that a defendant may still be liable
for the injuries he or she caused, even though the plaintiff was guilty of
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE (see negligence), if the defendant could
have avoided injury to the plaintiff by exercising ordinary care at the
last moment and after the plaintiff’s negligence had ceased.
EXAMPLE: A passerby without a hard hat walks on a construction site that
is clearly marked “Hard Hats Required.” A worker is throwing garbage
out of a window so that it will fall into a garbage dump below. One of
the pieces of garbage hits the passerby. Although the passerby is at fault
for not wearing a hard hat, the worker may be held liable since he had
the last clear chance to avoid the injury either by being more careful
with the garbage or by carrying it to the dump site.
LAST-IN, FIRST-OUT [LIFO] see first-in, first-out [FIFO]; inventory.
LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT see will.
LAT. abbreviation for Latin.
LATENT AMBIGUITY language of legal effect that can be interpreted to
have more than one meaning. Extrinsic evidence, when allowable, is
often necessary to determine the correct interpretation of a latent
ambiguity. In contract law, a latent ambiguity that one party interprets
differently from the other party can prevent the meeting of the minds
necessary to the formation of a valid contract.
LATENT DEFECT a defect that is hidden from knowledge as well as from
sight and one that would not be discovered even by the exercise of
ordinary and reasonable care.
EXAMPLE: A part of a new car engine was prone to wearing down after a
few hundred miles, causing the engine to stop immediately. The part
was inside the engine and could not be detected by even a very thorough
examination unless the engine was dismantled. The faulty part was a
latent defect of the engine.
Compare inherent defect; patent defect. See products liability;
warranty [WARRANTY OF HABITABILITY].
LATERAL SUPPORT an owner of real property has the right to have
one’s land, in its natural condition, supported and held in place from the
sides by one’s neighbor’s land.
LAW 1. the legislative pronouncement of rules to guide one’s actions in
society; 2. the total of those rules of conduct put in force by legislative
authority or court decisions, or established by local custom. See also
case law; common law; session laws; statute; substantive law;
uniform laws; wager of law.
AT LAW see at law.
LAW, CHOICE OF see conflict of law [choice of law].
LAW DIV. abbreviation for Law Division.
LAWFUL any act performed within the bounds of law or authorized by law
and that does not give rise to any legal liability; activity that is not
illegal and is not contrary to public policy.
LAW MERCHANT a body of commercial law governing merchants in
England, particularly noted for contributions to the law of negotiable
instruments. The law merchant was the common law’s recognition of
usages and procedures that had developed over a long period among
merchants in England and other European countries. As part of the
common law of England, it was incorporated into American law and has
been largely supplemented by common law evolution and statutory
enactment.
LAW OF ADMIRALTY see maritime law.
LAW OF CAPTURE see capture.
LAW OF THE CASE doctrine whereby courts will refuse to consider
matters of law that have been already adjudicated by motion or appeal
in the same cause; reflects the courts’ unwillingness to reopen issues
already finally determined in a suit.
EXAMPLE: A judge schedules a pre-trial hearing to decide what evidence
will be allowed at trial. Each party is given an opportunity to make
arguments, and the judge decides not to allow a statement by one of the
plaintiff’s witnesses. At trial, the plaintiff attempts to argue for the
introduction of the statement. Because of the pre-trial decision, the
judge applies the law of the case doctrine and refuses to allow the
introduction of the statement.
Compare collateral [COLLATERAL ESTOPPEL]; double jeopardy.
LAW OF THE LAND 1. phrase first used in Magna Carta to refer to the
then established law of the kingdom as distinguished from Roman or
civil law; 2. today, basic principles of justice in agreement with due
process of law; those rights that the legislature cannot abolish or
significantly limit, because they are fundamental to our system of
liberty and justice. 3. the law as developed by the courts or in statutes
in pursuance of those basic principles or rights. The United States
Constitution (Article 6, Section 2) establishes itself, and laws made
under its authority, and treaties of the United States, as the “supreme
law of the land.”
LAW, QUESTION OF see question of law.
LAW REPORTS see advance sheets; reports.
LAWSUIT see suit.
LAWYER see attorney.
LAY WITNESS any witness not testifying as an expert witness and who
is thereby generally precluded from testifying in the form of an opinion.
However, under federal rules a “lay witness” is able to testify in the
form of an opinion or inference if the testimony is (a) rationally based
on the perceptions of the witness, and (b) helpful to a clear
understanding of his or her testimony or the determination of a fact in
issue. The witness may be a LAY EXPERT WITNESS, meaning a person
whose expertise or special competence derives from experience in a
field of endeavor rather than from studies or diplomas.
LEADERSHIP PACS see political action committee [LEADERSHIP PACS].
LEADING CASE a case continually cited for a proposition of law that
controls in that particular area. For example, Katz v. United States, 389
U.S. 347 (1967), is a leading case in the area of search and seizure, and
Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137 (1803), is a leading case in
constitutional law. See also landmark.
LEADING QUESTION a question posed by a trial lawyer that is
sometimes improper because it suggests to the witness the answer he or
she is to deliver, or in effect prompts answers in disregard of actual
memory.
EXAMPLE: In direct examination during the trial, the witness is asked,
“Isn’t it true that you saw Ilona standing outside the store waiting for a
friend when the robbery occurred?” That question will be objected to as
a leading question since it suggests to the witness how he or she should
explain or recall the event, instead of simply inquiring how the event
actually took place. However, leading questions are proper as part of
cross-examination since the object of such examination is to test the
credibility of the statement made during direct examination.
LEASE 1. an agreement by the lessor temporarily to give up possession of
property while retaining legal ownership (title); 2. an agreement by the
owner landlord to turn over, for all purposes not prohibited by terms of
the lease, specifically described premises to the exclusive possession of
the lessee for a definite period and for a consideration called rent. See
release [LEASE AND RELEASE].
LEASE-PURCHASE see mortgage [LEASE-PURCHASE].
NET LEASE while normally a landlord pays costs such as insurance,
maintenance, and taxes, under a net lease those costs are borne by the
tenant, in addition to rent.
PROPRIETARY LEASE the kind of lease that the resident/stockholder in a
cooperative apartment maintains, with the cooperative as owner of the
building. See condominium.
SUBLEASE [UNDERLEASE] a transition whereby a tenant [one who has
leased premises from the owner, or landlord] grants an interest in the
leased premises less than his own, or reserves to himself a reversionary
interest in the term. See assignment, which connotes the conveyance of
the whole term of a lease.
LEASEHOLD the estate in real property of a lessee, created by a lease;
generally an estate of fixed duration, but may also describe tenancy at
will, a month-to-month tenancy, PERIODIC tenancy, etc. (see tenancy).
LEASE-PURCHASE AGREEMENT [CONTRACT] see mortgage
[LEASE-PURCHASE AGREEMENT [CONTRACT]].
LEAVE OF COURT permission obtained from a court to take some action
that, without such permission, would not be allowable. This permission
in some instances may come before or after the expiration of the period
in which the action was to be taken. For instance, a trustee may need
“leave of court” in order to spend trust corpus for the support of the
trust beneficiary; an attorney will need “leave of court” in order to file
papers after the time allowed for filing the papers has elapsed.
LEGACY a disposition by will of personal property; synonymous with
bequest, but properly distinguished from devise, which is a disposition
of real property.
ABATEMENT OF A LEGACY see abatement [ABATEMENT OF A LEGACY].
ALTERNATE LEGACY disposition whereby testator leaves one of two or
more gifts to a person without specifically stating which gift should
pass.
CONTINGENT LEGACY a legacy which will only pass upon the happening
of some event, such as “if she reaches the age of twenty-five.”
DEMONSTRATIVE LEGACY a gift of stated value that identifies a particular
asset as the primary source of payment but permits the executor to draw
on the general assets of the estate once the primary source has been
exhausted. Therefore, a “demonstrative legacy” is in nature both a
GENERAL LEGACY, because it bequeaths a specified amount, and a
SPECIFIC LEGACY in that it designates the fund from which the payment
is made.
GENERAL LEGACY one designated primarily by quantity or amount and
may be paid out of general assets without regard to any particular fund
or thing. For example, a bequest of 270 shares of stock that testator did
not describe as specified shares by numbers or otherwise was a general
legacy.
LEGATEE recipient of personal property by virtue of a will—i.e., the
recipient of a “legacy.”
RESIDUARY LEGACY A GENERAL LEGACY (see above) wherein fall all the
assets of the estate after all other legacies have been satisfied and all
charges, debts, and costs [of the estate and its administration] have been
paid. See residuary legacy.
SPECIFIC LEGACY a bequest of some definite or specific part of a
testator’s estate which is capable of being designated, identified and
distinguished from other like things composing the testator’s estate; that
which can be distinguished from other articles of the same general
nature in the estate.
LEGAL ADVOCATE an attorney.
LEGAL AGE the age, determined by each state, at which a person
becomes responsible for his or her actions and is capable of entering
into contracts or other business relationships. In many jurisdictions, the
legal age is 18, although the legal age for some activities, such as
drinking, may be higher, and for others, such as driving a car, may be
lower. See majority, age of.
LEGAL AID (SOCIETY) state-funded and state-administered offices
established throughout the country to deliver legal services to
financially needy litigants, that is, those unable to afford to retain
private counsel. See also Legal Services Corporation; public
defender.
LEGAL ASSISTANT see paralegal.
LEGAL CAPACITY TO SUE requirement that a person bringing suit
have a sound mind, be of lawful age, and be under no restraint or legal
disability. The term has no reference to failure of the petition to show a
right of action in the plaintiff.
LEGAL CONSIDERATION see consideration [LEGAL CONSIDERATION].
LEGAL DETRIMENT giving up something a person was privileged to
retain, or doing or refraining from doing something that a person was
privileged not to do, or not to refrain from doing. Where a person
changes his or her legal position, or assumes duties or liabilities not
therefore imposed, that change of position constitutes the consideration
necessary to form a contract and therefore imposes duties on the person
benefiting from the detriment.
LEGAL DISCRETION see discretion [LEGAL DISCRETION].
LEGAL DUTY that which the law requires be done or forborne. Breach of
a legal duty owed another is an element of negligence and is the essence
of most actions in tort. Legal duties not otherwise imposed may be
created by a contract or by one’s entering into some other such
relationship (landlord-tenant, host-invitee, etc.).
EXAMPLE: In an apartment house, a landlord usually has the legal duty to
keep the common areas, such as a hallway, clean and in good repair. If a
tenant injures himself or herself because a light bulb in a hallway has
gone out and the landlord has been made aware that the bulb is not
working, the landlord’s breach of the legal duty makes him or her liable.
LEGAL ESTATE see estate [LEGAL ESTATE].
LEGAL FICTION a fact presumed in law, regardless of its truth, for the
purpose of justice or convenience. For example, the domicile of the
owner is presumed to be the situs of personal property for taxing
purposes regardless of where it is actually located. The term legal
fiction commonly occurs in cases where adherence to the fiction is
perceived as working an injustice. Thus, when the personal property has
never been in the state where the owner is domiciled and it would
clearly be unfair to tax the property, the court will dispense with the
situs presumption as a mere legal fiction.
LEGAL HEIRS see heirs.
LEGAL IMPOSSIBILITY see impossibility [LEGAL IMPOSSIBILITY].
LEGAL INJURY see injury [LEGAL INJURY].
LEGAL NOTICE see notice [LEGAL NOTICE].
LEGAL PERMANENT RESIDENT [LPR] an immigration term for an
alien who has entered the United States and has legally established
permission to remain. The person receives a document known as a
green card and is entitled to live and work (unless the job is restricted
to citizens) in the United States on a permanent basis, provided the
person does not commit any actions that would make him or her
removable under immigration law. See deportability; inadmissibility.
A permanent resident must follow all laws of the United States,
including paying income taxes, but is not entitled to vote in federal or
state elections. Permanent resident status is a first step toward becoming
a naturalized citizen. See immigration and customs enforcement
[ICE].
LEGAL SECRETARY secretary having specific familiarity with legal
language and processes, such as the filing of court documents.
LEGAL SEPARATION see divorce [SEPARATION]; separation
agreement.
LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION a corporation established by
Congress in 1974 to provide financial support for legal assistance in
noncriminal proceedings or matters to persons financially unable to
afford legal assistance. The Corporation is empowered to make grants
to qualified programs and to contract with outside organizations. See
Legal Aid.
LEGAL TENDER the kind of money lawfully acceptable for payment of a
debt where the medium of payment is not specified by statute or
agreement. All legal tender is money, but not all money is legal tender.
Congress has the power to determine what is legal tender. All coins and
paper money of the United States, as well as Federal Reserve notes and
circulating notes of Federal Reserve banks and national banking
associations, are legal tender.
LEGATEE one who takes a legacy.
LEGISLATION the act of giving or enacting laws; the power to make
laws; the act of legislating; preparation and enactment of laws; the
making of laws by express decree; the exercise of sovereign power.
LEGISLATION, SPECIAL see special legislation.
LEGISLATIVE HISTORY those recorded events leading up to the
passage of a bill including committee reports, hearings, and debates.
Published commentary may accompany the legislation itself. Courts
often look to the legislative history in later determining the meaning of
a particular statute. Compare plain meaning (rule).
LEGISLATIVE INTENT see intent [LEGISLATIVE INTENT].
LEND to part with a thing of value for either a fixed or indefinite period.
Such item or something equivalent to it must be returned at the time
originally established or when lawfully demanded. When used in a will,
it means “give” or “devise” unless it is manifest that the testator
intended otherwise.
LESSEE one who holds an estate by virtue of a lease; the tenant of a
landlord.
LESSER-INCLUDED OFFENSE 1. a violation of law that is necessarily
established by proof of a greater offense and that is properly submitted
to the jury, should the prosecution’s proof fail to establish guilt of the
greater offense charged, without necessity of multiple indictment; 2.
that necessarily committed lesser offense accompanying the conduct
leading to a greater offense.
EXAMPLE: Mei-Li is charged with robbery, which is the taking of
property by threat or fear of violence. If Mei-Li cannot be convicted of
robbery because there is insufficient proof of a threat or fear, she could
still be convicted of larceny, which is simply the taking of another’s
property. Larceny is a lesser-included offense in relation to robbery.
See graded offense; plea bargaining.
LESSOR one who grants a lease to another, thereby transferring exclusive
temporary right of possession of certain property, subject only to rights
expressly retained by the owner.
LET to lease; 1. to grant the use of realty for a compensation. 2. The term
does not always connote the act of leasing, but the granting of a license.
LETTER OF CREDIT in commercial law, a promise by a bank or other
issuer that it will honor on behalf of one of its customer’s demands for
payment upon compliance with specified conditions; intended to
facilitate long-distance sales by allowing a buyer to establish a credit
line against which a seller can draw. Letters of credit guard against risk
insolvency and uncertainty in delivery and settlement due to market
fluctuations.
LETTER OF INTENT customarily employed to reduce to writing a
preliminary understanding of the parties. This letter is not a contract,
and it does not constitute a binding agreement. Rather, it is an
expression of tentative intentions of the parties and creates no liability
as between the parties. It is, in essence, “an agreement to agree.” If a
formal writing is contemplated by the parties, a binding contract may
arise between them before the writing is executed as long as there has
been a meeting of the minds concerning the essential elements of the
writing.
LETTER RULING a written statement issued to a taxpayer by the Office
of Assistant Commissioner of Tax in which interpretation of the tax
laws are made and applied to a specific set of facts.
LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION document issued by a probate court
appointing the administrator or administratrix of the estate of a
decedent. If the decedent left a will naming a particular executor or
executrix, the corresponding term for the court document is LETTERS
TESTAMENTARY. If the decedent left a will but failed to name an executor
or the named executor of a will cannot or refuses to serve, the document
is termed LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION CTA. CTA stands for the Latin
CUM TESTAMENTO ANNEXO and means “with the will annexed.” If a
previous administrator or executor fails to complete the administration
of the estate the document is called LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION DBN.
DBN stands for the Latin DE BONIS NON and means “goods not
administered.” Modern usage has favored the term SUCCESSOR
ADMINISTRATOR.
LETTERS ROGATORY see rogatory letters.
LETTERS TESTAMENTARY see letters of administration [LETTERS
TESTAMENTARY].
LETTER STOCK a category of stock that derives its name from an
inscription on the face of the stock certificate, indicating that the shares
have not been registered with the Securities and Exchange
Commission and, therefore, cannot be sold to the general public. See
restricted securities.
LEVARI FACIAS see fieri facias [LEVARI FACIAS].
LEVEL PAYMENT MORTGAGE see mortgage [FIXED PAYMENT
MORTGAGE].
LEVERAGE the use of debt to finance capital investment, for the
purpose of increasing the investor’s rate of return on his equity. As long
as the return income and appreciation on the total investment exceed the
interest paid on the borrowed money, the investor benefits.
LEVY 1. to raise or collect; 2. to seize; 3. to assess, as to levy a tax; 4. a
seizure or levying, as of land or other property or rights, through lawful
process or by force. When one places a levy upon some property, right
or a CHOSE IN ACTION (see chose), it is seized and may be sold to satisfy
a judgment. See writ of execution.
LEWD [LEWDNESS] criminal act of sexual indecency committed in
public. Exposure of intimate parts for the purpose of arousing or
gratifying the sexual desire of the actor (or of any other person) when
such exposure is likely to be observed by nonconsenting persons who
would be affronted. INDECENT EXPOSURE is sometimes synonymous
with lewdness but more often is considered to be nudity in public, a
lesser offense and punishable generally as a misdemeanor.
Enforcement may not be practiced in such areas as nude beaches but
enforcement may take place if a beachgoer leaves the beach while still
nude. Lewd and lascivious behavior means likely to be thought of as
sexual conduct.
LEXIS see search engine.
LEX LOCI CONTRACTUS (le*ks lo@’-ke@ko*n-tra*k’-tu@s) Lat.: law of the
place of making a contract. See conflict of laws.
LEX LOCI DELICTI (le*ks lo@’-ke@de*-lĭk’-te@) Lat.: law of the place of the
wrong. See conflict of laws.
L. FR. abbreviation for Law French.
LIABILITY 1. an obligation to do or refrain from doing something; 2. a
duty that eventually must be performed; 3. an obligation to pay money;
4. money owed, as opposed to an asset; 5. responsibility for one’s
conduct, such as contractual liability, tort liability, criminal liability,
etc. See limited liability; products liability; strict liability; vicarious
liability.
EXAMPLE: Lauren runs a red light and hits another car, injuring both the
driver and the passenger. Lauren has incurred tort liability for her
action.
ABSOLUTE LIABILITY see strict liability.
CURRENT LIABILITIES in accounting, debts due within one year,
including salary payable to employees, purchase costs payable to
suppliers, taxes and annual portion due on long-term debt.
JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY when tortious conduct is the cause of a
single and indivisible harm, each contributing tortfeasor is liable to the
same extent and in the same manner as if they had performed the
wrongful act themselves. See joint and several.
JOINT LIABILITY created where two or more persons, who may or may
not have a legal relationship to each other, owe another a joint duty and
by common neglect of that duty the other person is injured. See joint
liability
LIABILITY WITHOUT FAULT see strict liability..
LONG-TERM LIABILITIES in accounting, debts due after one year,
including term bank loans, mortgages payable, bonds outstanding and
liabilities under long-term lease and rental agreements.
PRIMARY LIABILITY liability imposed upon the party directly responsible
for the loss or injury.
SECONDARY LIABILITY that which arises only when the party directly
liable fails to perform or otherwise defaults in performance. Frequently
refers to the liability of a guarantor.
STRICT LIABILITY see strict liability.
VICARIOUS LIABILITY see vicarious liability.
LIABILITY WITHOUT FAULT see strict liability.
LIABLE responsible for; obligated in law.
LIBEL a tort consisting of a false, malicious, unprivileged publication
aiming to defame a living person or to mar the memory of one dead.
Printed or written material, signs or pictures that tend to expose a person
to public scorn, hatred, contempt or ridicule may be considered libelous.
EXAMPLE: A candidate for public office reads in the paper of an earlier
conviction against him for bribery. After some investigation, the
candidate finds out that Victor, who is in contact with his opponent, had
planted the story, which is unquestionably false, in order to ruin the
candidate’s standing in the election. The candidate can sue Victor or the
newspaper for libel.
See seditious libel. Compare privileged communications; slander.
LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION see construction [LIBERAL [EQUITABLE]
CONSTRUCTION].
LIBERTY freedom; the ability to enjoy all the rights granted by the United
States and a particular state’s constitution, as well as other rights such as
the right to earn a living, the right to acquire knowledge, the right to
marry, etc.; refers to the fullest scope of freedoms one has but at the
same time limits those freedoms so as not to interfere with another
person’s exercise of them.
LIBERTY, CIVIL see civil rights.
LICENSE a grant of permission needed to legalize doing a particular thing,
exercising a certain privilege or pursuing a particular business or
occupation. Licenses may be granted by private persons or by
governmental authority.
In the law of property, a license is a personal privilege or permission
with respect to some use of land, and is revocable at the will of the
landowner. The privilege attaches only to the party holding it and not to
the land itself, since, unlike an easement, a license does not represent
an estate or interest in the land.
EXAMPLE: When Lynn opens a new shop in a small shopping center, a
neighboring businessman gives her license to use some of his storage
space. The businessman can deny Lynn the use of that space at any
time, and, most importantly, if Lynn ever sells her store, she could not
guarantee that storage space to the purchaser.
Compare franchise; lease; monopoly.
LICENSEE one to whom a license has been granted; in property, one
whose presence on the premises is not invited, but tolerated. Thus, a
licensee is neither a customer, nor a servant, nor a trespasser, and does
not stand in any contractual relation with the owner of the premises, but
is permitted expressly or impliedly to go upon the property of another
merely for his own interest, convenience, or gratification. Compare
invitee.
LICENSE TAX the fee or tax charged by a government to issue the license
required for engaging in some regulated activity such as the sale of
liquor or the practice of a profession.
LICENSOR one who grants a license.
LIE DETECTOR TEST see polygraph.
LIEN a charge, hold or claim upon the property of another as security for
some debt or charge. The term connotes the right the law gives to have
a debt satisfied out of the property to which it attaches, if necessary by
the sale of the property.
ARTISAN’S LIEN a statutory lien permitting an artisan to retain possession
of a piece of work until payment for the labor performed on it is
received.
EQUITABLE LIEN a right in equity, but not at law, to have specific
property applied in satisfaction of a debt. Whenever parties enter into an
agreement indicating an intention to post some particular property as
security for an obligation, an equitable lien is created on such property.
An equitable lien may also be created by implication and is based on the
doctrine of unjust enrichment.
FACTOR’S LIEN a lien that the factor has on goods consigned to him or
her while in his or her possession for any advances made by him or her
and for his or her commissions. In common law, it was purely a
possessory lien and was lost by surrender of possession, but today,
under the Uniform Commercial Code, a written security agreement is a
sufficient substitute for possession.
FEDERAL TAX LIEN a lien of the United States on all property and rights
to property of a taxpayer who fails to pay a tax for which he or she is
liable to the federal government.
FLOATING LIEN in commercial law, one that covers not only inventory
and accounts possessed by the debtor at the time of the original loan,
but also his or her after-acquired property of inventory or accounts.
The floating lien allows a buyer’s operations to be completely financed
with periodic advances and repayments secured by changing collateral
of raw materials, work in progress, finished goods, proceeds, etc. This
financing may be accomplished in a single security agreement, with
only one filing required.
GARAGEMAN’S LIEN see MECHANIC’S LIEN (below).
JUDGMENT LIEN a lien on a judgment debtor’s property in favor of a
judgment creditor. When judgment has been entered in a civil case, and
the party liable for the judgment fails to pay it, the judgment creditor
may file a lien against the property of the party liable, to give notice that
the property is subject to sale in satisfaction of the judgment. The
judgment creditor may enforce the lien by having the sheriff seize the
property and sell it at a sheriff’s sale.
LANDLORD’S LIEN in common law, the landlord’s right to levy (distress)
upon the goods of a tenant in satisfaction of unpaid rents or property
damage; now generally a statutory lien giving the lessor status of a
preferred creditor with regard to the lessee’s property.
MECHANIC’S LIEN one created to secure priority of payment for value of
work performed and materials furnished in erecting or repairing a
structure; attaches to the land as well as its buildings and improvements.
Statutes according priority to the satisfaction of the debt represented by
a mechanic’s lien are found in most jurisdictions and extend to
automobiles and other goods as well as to structures. As applied to
automobiles, the claim is sometimes called GARAGEMAN’S LIEN.
EXAMPLE: Standard Heating and Air Conditioning Company has installed
all the ventilation in an office complex. The owner of the complex falls
into bankruptcy and cannot pay Standard. By operation of the law of the
state in which the work was done, Standard has a mechanic’s lien
equalling the value of the work it performed. That lien attaches to the
office complex, so that Standard has a priority of payment for any
money that is paid to the complex.
PRIOR LIEN as between two liens, or in a class of liens, the one superior
to the others.
STATE TAX LIEN a security interest in the property of a taxpayer
established by statute, of which the tax collector may avail himself upon
default of payment of taxes. Unlike liens on personal property, which
may be made a charge upon other personal property of the owner, such
lien on real property does not extend to property other than that being
assessed unless expressly authorized by statute. Most jurisdictions give
these liens priority over mortgages and other liens existing against the
property.
TAX LIEN a statutory lien which exists in favor of a state or municipality
and gives the tax collector a security interest in the taxed property.
Analogous to a JUDGMENT LIEN (above).
WAREHOUSEMAN’S LIEN right of a warehouseman to maintain possession
of goods until all storage charges have been paid.
LIEN JURISDICTION jurisdiction in which title to the mortgaged
premises remains with the mortgagor pending payment of the
mortgage price. See mortgage; title jurisdiction.
LIEN THEORY OF MORTGAGE see mortgage [LIEN THEORY].
LIFE ESTATE an estate whose duration is limited by the life of the person
holding it or by that of some other person [per autre vie]. It is a
freehold interest in land.
EXAMPLE: A grandfather conveys his summer home to his daughter for
life and then to his three grandchildren. Since the daughter’s interest in
the house exists only so long as she is alive, her interest is considered a
life estate.
LIFE EXPECTANCY the period of time a person is predicted to live,
based on their present age and sex. This figure is most frequently used
by actuaries to determine insurance premiums.
LIFE INTEREST an interest in property measured by the life of either the
person using the property or by another’s life. See life estate.
LIFE TENANT tenant whose legal right to remain in possession of certain
lands is measured either by his or her life or the life of another. See life
estate.
LIFO last-in, first-out. See first-in, first-out; inventory.
LIKE-KIND EXCHANGE see sale or exchange. Compare boot.
LIMINE see in limine.
LIMITATION a restriction or restraint; the act of limiting. A state
constitution constitutes a limitation on the power that the state may
exercise, not a grant of power. “Limitation” also declares the nature and
extent of the estate granted, and the uses for which the grant is made.
For example, in an estate granted “to A and his heirs,” the phrase “and
his heirs” constitutes words of limitation and indicates that A has a fee
simple, and can use the land as he pleases. Also, a limitation determines
an estate upon the happening of the event itself without the necessity of
doing any act to regain the estate, such as re-entry. See statute of
limitations.
LIMITATIONS PERIOD see statute of limitations.
LIMITATIONS, STATUTE OF see statute of limitations.
LIMITATION, WORDS OF see words of limitation.
LIMITED JURISDICTION refers to courts that are only authorized to
hear and decide certain or special types of cases; also known as SPECIAL
JURISDICTION. See jurisdiction.
EXAMPLE: The Court of Claims has limited jurisdiction to only hear
claims against the United States based on certain types of violations.
A small claims court is limited to a specified dollar amount that it can
litigate.
LIMITED LIABILITY the limitation placed on the amount an investor of
a corporation can lose resulting from a lawsuit against the corporation
or other loss suffered by the corporation; the liability for losses that is
limited to the amount an investor or shareholder invests in the
corporation. The corporation itself also enjoys limited liability inasmuch
as the corporation’s obligations are always limited to its assets unless,
with regard to particular transactions, personal responsibility is assumed
by an officer or shareholder of the corporation.
EXAMPLE: Iggy purchases ten shares of a corporation’s stock for $5 a
share. If the corporation becomes bankrupt with many creditors who are
unpaid, Iggy’s liability is limited to the $50 he invested. He can never be
charged for a greater amount.
LIMITED PARTNERSHIP see partnership [LIMITED PARTNERSHIP].
LIMIT ORDER see order [LIMIT ORDER].
LINEAGE race; family; kin; blood. A common ancestor with all ascending
and descending persons. See lineal.
LINEAL refers to descent by a direct line of succession in ancestry. See
consanguinity [LINEAL CONSANGUINITY].
LINEAL HEIRS see heirs [LINEAL HEIRS].
LINE OF CREDIT see credit [LINE OF CREDIT].
LINEUP the police procedure in which a person suspected of a crime is
placed in a line with several other persons and a witness to the crime
attempts to identify the suspect as the person who committed the crime.
The procedure must not be “unduly suggestive,” or the identification
will not be admissible in a criminal trial.
LIQUIDATE to settle; to determine the amount due, and to whom due, and
then to extinguish the indebtedness. Although the term more properly
signifies the adjustment or settlement of debts, to liquidate often means
to pay.
LIQUIDATE A BUSINESS to assemble and mobilize the assets of the
business, settle with creditors and debtors, and apportion remaining
assets, if any, among the shareholders or owners.
LIQUIDATE A CLAIM to determine by agreement or litigation the precise
amount of the claim, and to settle it on the basis of that determination.
LIQUIDATED AMOUNT [OBLIGATION] amount that may be readily
ascertained by a mere computation based on the terms of the obligation
or instrument. See liquidate; sum certain. Compare unliquidated.
LIQUIDATED DAMAGES a stipulated contractual amount that the
parties agree is a reasonable estimation of the damages owing to one in
the event of a breach by the other.
EXAMPLE: Safety Corporation and Fire Prevention, Inc., enter into a longterm contract whereby Fire Prevention supplies Safety with all the
sprinkler systems Safety needs. Instead of leaving a damage figure to a
court decision if either party should breach the agreement, the parties
include a liquidated damages clause in the contract. That clause
provides both a dollar figure and a formula for calculating damages,
with the higher of the two figures constituting the maximum damages
either party could charge.
LIQUIDATED SUM CERTAIN see sum certain [LIQUIDATED SUM
CERTAIN].
LIQUIDATION DIVIDEND see dividend [LIQUIDATATION DIVIDEND].
LIS PENDENS (le@s pe*n’-de*ns) Lat.: a pending lawsuit. Refers to the
maxim that pending the suit nothing should be changed; thus, for
example, one who acquired an interest in property from a party to
litigation respecting such property takes that interest subject to the
decree or judgment in such litigation and is bound by it.
NOTICE OF LIS PENDENS in some jurisdictions, a publicly recorded
notice required to warn persons (such as prospective purchasers) that
title to the property is in litigation and that they will be bound by a
possibly adverse judgment.
LISTED STOCK a company’s stock that is traded on an organized stock
exchange. To be listed, the company must meet requirements of the
selected exchange and file application for listing with both the exchange
and the Securities and Exchange Commission.
LISTING in real estate, an agency relationship between the seller and
broker with the purpose of effecting a juncture between buyers and
sellers of real property with an ultimate pecuniary reward to the broker
for his or her part in “bringing the parties together.” See also listed
stock.
LITE PENDENTE see pendente lite.
LITERAL CONSTRUCTION see construction [STRICT [LITERAL]
CONSTRUCTION].
LITERAL DENIAL see negative pregnant [LITERAL DENIAL].
LITIGANTS the parties actively involved in a lawsuit; plaintiffs or
defendants involved in litigation.
LITIGATION a judicial contest aiming to determine and enforce legal
rights. See also action; case; suit; vexatious litigation.
LITIGIOUS most commonly used to refer to one’s fondness for or
propensity to become engaged in litigation. Thus, a citizen who
repeatedly sues his or her neighbor over various issues would be called
“litigious.” Also, the subject of a lawsuit or action. Compare malicious
prosecution. See also vexatious litigation.
LIVERY OF SEISIN an ancient ceremony signifying an alienation of
land by feoffment. It consisted of a formal delivery of possession of the
premises, symbolized by the manual delivery of a clod or piece of turf
from the land, all of which was done in the presence of witnesses. See
seisin.
LIVE VIEW TRANSCRIPT see court reporters [LIVE VIEW].
LIVING TRUST see trust [LIVING TRUST].
L.J. abbreviation for Law Judge.
LKA last known address.
LL.B. see J.D.
LOAN delivery of a sum of money to another under a contract to return at
some future time an equivalent amount with or without an additional
sum agreed upon for its use; and if such be the intent of the parties the
transaction will be deemed a loan regardless of its form. The
characterization of a transaction as a loan or some other type of
borrowing has significance in ascertaining whether usury laws apply to
the amount of interest being charged. See mortgage.
LOANSHARKING the practice of loaning money at usurious rates of
interest. Many states have laws that render unsurious interest and in
some instances even the underlying debt uncollectable. The use or the
threat to use violence in order to collect the interest or the debt
constitutes the crime of extortion. See extortion; usury.
LOBBYING EXPENSE see expense [LOBBYING EXPENSE].
LOBBYIST one engaged in the business of persuading legislators to pass
laws that are favorable, and to defeat those that are unfavorable, to the
interests of the lobbyist or of his or her clients.
LOCATION see mining [LOCATION].
LOCKDOWN a temporary confinement of inmates in a correctional
facility to their cells on a 24-hour basis with no outside contact and little
if any ordinary privileges or recreation. Such a restriction on normal
activity of prisoners is done as a security measure following an escape
or riot or during the course of some other prison emergency. Prison
officials have been accorded considerable latitude by the courts in the
use of such lockdowns both in terms of duration and quality. Any
measures taken by prison officials that are “unnecessarily cruel” or
completely unjustified may violate an inmate’s right to be free from
cruel and unusual punishment.
LOCKOUT the employer counterpart of an employee strike. The
employer locks out the employees preventing them from working in an
effort to gain a better bargaining position in labor negotiations.
Unemployment benefits may accrue to employees who are locked out as
opposed to employees on strike. See collective bargaining.
LOCKUP see jail.
LOCO PARENTIS see in loco parentis.
LOCUS (lo@’-ku*s) Lat.: the place.
LOCUS CONTRACTUS (ko*n-tra*k’-tu@s) Lat.: the place where the contract
was made.
LOCUS DELICTI (de*-lĭk’-te@) Lat.: the place where the wrong occurred.
LOCUS IN QUO (ĭn kwo@) Lat.: the place where or in which. Refers to a
locale where an offense was committed or a cause of action arose.
LOCUS POENITENTIAE (po@-e*-nĭ-te*n’-she@-ῑ) Lat.: a place for repentance.
The opportunity for one to change his or her mind.
LOCUS SIGILLI (sĭ-jĭl’-le@) Lat.: the place of the seal; usually abbreviated
L.S. Commonly used within brackets on copies of documents to
indicate the position of the seal in the original; also used to call attention
of the signer to the place for his or her seal.
LOGROLLING refers to schemes by legislators to force passage of
desired bills without convincing their colleagues of the merits of their
proposals. One type of logrolling is the inclusion under one bill of
secondary bills, each of which probably would not be approved if voted
on singly.
EXAMPLE: Conservative legislators are finding it very difficult to get their
bills passed on the strength of the bills’ own merits. In an attempt to
sidestep this problem, the legislators tack their proposals onto a tax bill
that has to be passed or government employees cannot be paid. This
attempt is called logrolling.
Another practice is for legislators to agree to vote for each other’s
bills, even if neither has any interest in the other’s bill.
LOITER to linger for no evident reason, particularly in a public place, near
a school or a transportation facility. There are criminal prohibitions of
such behavior as loitering for purposes of begging, gambling, soliciting
another to engage in sexual intercourse, or for the purpose of selling or
using drugs; being masked or disguised in an unusual manner; or simply
not being able to give a satisfactory explanation of one’s behavior.
Compare probable cause; void for vagueness.
LONG-ARM STATUTES laws that allow a local forum to obtain
jurisdiction over nonresident defendants when the cause of action is
generated locally and affects local plaintiffs. Such expanded
jurisdiction is authorized where the contacts of the nonresident
defendant with the forum are regarded as sufficiently substantial.
EXAMPLE: Federated Television Company sells many televisions in a
particular state, but the company does not maintain any sales offices,
have any corporate headquarters or employ any sales agents in the state.
When one of its televisions explodes and burns down Chloe’s house,
Chloe can use the state’s long-arm statute to bring Federated into the
state court. Without the statute, there may be a procedural difficulty in
forcing Federated to come in to Chloe’s state and defend against the
action or pay for the damages caused.
Long-arm statutes are commonly employed to allow a local court to
exercise jurisdiction over nonresident motorists who cause automobile
accidents within the state.
LONG POSITION in finance, the ownership of a stock or security,
subjecting the owner to risk of loss in case the security declines in
value. Compare selling short.
LONG-TERM CAPITAL GAIN see capital [CAPITAL GAINS OR LOSSES].
LONG-TERM LIABILITY see liability [LONG-TERM LIABILITIES].
LOOKOUT person specifically charged with duty of observing lights,
sounds, echoes, or any obstruction to navigation. Such a person must
devote his or her undivided attention to the task with that watchfulness
that a prudent and reasonable person must maintain for his or her own
safety and the safety of others. The doctrine of PROPER LOOKOUT
requires that one operating a motor vehicle use such care, prudence, and
watchfulness as a person of ordinary care and prudence would use under
similar circumstances to avoid liability for negligent operation of the
vehicle. In popular usage, it refers to a person stationed outside the area
where a crime is being committed to watch for police or persons who
may alert police or be witnesses to the crime.
LORD at common law, one who granted a feudal estate in land to a tenant.
For instance, the King would be the Lord of the Dukes and other nobles
to whom the Crown had granted property; the dukes and other nobles
were the lords of the persons to whom they in turn granted property.
The lord was responsible for protecting and maintaining order among
his tenants, for which purpose he maintained a court. In return, the
tenant was responsible for providing services to the lord. Under the
English Parliamentary system of government, the House of Lords arose
to provide representation for nobles. Traditionally, membership in the
House of Lords was hereditary. In recent times, the Crown has
appointed individuals as lords for life only, with the individual’s title
ceasing at his death.
LORD CAMPBELL ACT the English statute that first provided that the
surviving family of a person who suffered a wrongful death may sue
the tortfeasor for damages. It is to be distinguished from the
WRONGFUL DEATH STATUTE, which provides that the personal
representative of a person who has suffered a wrongful death may sue
for damages, thus contravening the common law rule that an action for
personal injuries did not survive the plaintiff’s death. Most states have
enacted some form of a Lord Campbell Act or wrongful death statue.
LOSS the act of losing or the thing lost; synonymous with “damage”; as
used in an insurance policy, a state of fact of being lost or destroyed,
ruin or destruction; and where a policy requires notices of a loss, refers
to the date that a fraud was discovered. See also casualty loss; lost
property; risk of loss; total loss.
LOSS OF BARGAIN see benefit of the bargain (rule) [LOSS OF
BARGAIN].
LOST PROPERTY property involuntarily lost to the owner through
neglect, carelessness or oversight. Compare abandonment; mislaid
property.
LOT, ODD see odd lot.
LOTTERY a gambling scheme in which consideration is taken in return
for the offering of a prize that will be given on the basis of chance and
not merit. The use of interstate commerce, the U.S. mail, or radio or
television to distribute or advertise a lottery constitutes a federal crime.
However, these laws do not apply to any lottery conducted by a state,
nor to a SWEEPSTAKES (for which no consideration is required)
conducted by a business entity.
LOWER OF COST OR MARKET a method of valuating inventory,
using the lower of either the price of the item as of the time it was
purchased or the present market value of the item.
LPR see legal permanent resident [LPR].
L.S. see locus sigilli.
LSAT Law School Admissions Test. A standardized examination
administered by a private, nonprofit testing organization known as the
Educational Testing Service and used by law schools as one factor in
accepting applicants.
LUMP-SUM PAYMENT a single amount of money; a sum paid all at once
rather than in part or in installments. For instance, under an insurance
policy the proceeds may be paid immediately, as a lump-sum payment,
or at the option of the payee over time as an annuity or in installment
payments.
LUMP-SUM ALIMONY PAYMENT the discharge of one’s obligation to pay
alimony by the payment of a single lump sum. For income tax
purposes, the payment of lump-sum alimony may or may not shift the
income tax burden on the alimony to the payee, depending on the
circumstances.
LUMP-SUM DISTRIBUTION lump-sum payment to an employee from a
pension or profit-sharing plan upon termination of employment either
by retirement or death.
LYING IN WAIT hiding or concealing oneself for the purpose of
committing a crime when the opportunity arises. Regarding murder,
“lying in wait” implies premeditation or malice aforethought
necessary for first-degree murder.
M
MACHINATION that which is devised; a device; a hostile or treacherous
scheme; an artful design or plot.
MACRS see depreciation [MODIFIED ACCELERATED COST RECOVERY
SYSTEM].
MAFIA see organized crime.
MAGISTRATE l. a public civil officer, invested with some part of the
legislative, executive or judicial power. 2. In a narrower sense, the term
includes only inferior judicial officers, such as justices of the peace.
UNITED STATES [FEDERAL] MAGISTRATE appointed by U.S. District Court
judges, magistrates have powers that include the ability to hear and
determine specified pretrial motions pending before a district court, to
conduct hearings, including evidentiary hearings, and to submit
proposed findings of facts and recommendations for disposition.
MAGNA CARTA [MAGNA CHARTA] the “great charter” to which King
John gave his assent in 1215, and that is considered the fundamental
guarantee of rights and privileges under English law.
MAGNUSON-MOSS WARRANTY ACT federal statute requiring
warranties for consumer products to be written in easily understood
language and providing the Federal Trade Commission with better
means of protecting consumers.
MAIL BOX RULE a rule that an acceptance made in response to an offer
is valid and forms a binding contract at the time of dispatch of the
acceptance, as when it is placed in the mailbox, if that method of
accepting is a reasonable response to the offer.
MAIM at common law, to deprive a person of such a part of his or her body
as to render that person less able to fight or defend himself or herself
than that person would otherwise have been. See mayhem.
MAIN PURPOSE RULE see statute of frauds.
MAINTAIN to continue, to support, to sustain; to hold or keep in any
particular state or condition; in terms of “maintaining” a nuisance,
includes both knowledge of the nuisance and preserving and continuing
its existence by some positive act or by acquiescence.
MAINTENANCE see criminal maintenance.
MAJORITY, AGE OF the age when a person is considered legally
responsible for all his or her activities and becomes entitled to the legal
rights held by citizens generally.
MAJORITY OPINION see opinion.
MAKER in commercial law, one who executes a note, or indorses it
before its delivery to the payee, and who thereby assumes an absolute
obligation to make payment on the note.
EXAMPLE: Before a supplier ships any goods to Creative Bottle
Company, the supplier requires the company to sign a promissory note
explaining payment terms and dates and also obliging Creative Bottle to
meet those terms. Creative Bottle is the maker of the note since it is the
one who has to make the payments.
MALA IN SE see malum in se.
MALA PROHIBITA see malum prohibitum.
MALFEASANCE the doing of an illegal and unlawful act; wrongdoing,
especially a violation of the public trust by a public official.
EXAMPLE: Franz hopes to get re-elected and accepts a bribe to fund his
campaign from the Widgets Corporation in exchange for the promise of
providing them future government contracts. Franz has committed
malfeasance.
Compare misfeasance; nonfeasance.
MALICE the state of mind that accompanies the intentional doing of a
wrongful act without justification and in wanton or willful disregard of
the plain likelihood that harm will result.
With respect to slander and libel, malice is the mental state that
accompanies a false statement when the maker knows it to be false or
when the maker recklessly disregards the truth or falsity of it. Tort
liability may also attend the malicious disclosure of true but private
facts.
In malicious prosecution, there is intent to institute a prosecution
for a purpose other than bringing an offender to justice.
MALICE AFORETHOUGHT the distinguishing state of mind that may
render an unlawful homicide murder at common law. It is characterized
by a “person-endangering” mental disposition for which there is no
justification or excuse and as to which no mitigating circumstances
exist.
Malice aforethought is the characteristic mark of all murder, as
distinguished from the lesser crime of manslaughter, which lacks it. It
does not mean simply hatred, ill-will, a spite or a grudge. It extends to
and embraces generally the state of mind with which one commits a
wrongful act. It may be discoverable in a specific deliberate intent to
kill, in hardness of heart, cruelty, a wanton and depraved spirit, or in
utter disregard of society. It is not synonymous with premeditation,
however, since a particular person may not be intended to be injured.
Murder, therefore, at common law embraces cases where no intent to
kill existed, but where the state or frame of mind termed malice, in its
legal sense, prevailed. Modern homicide statutes do not employ malice
aforethought but instead rely upon an intent to cause death and the
absence of extenuating circumstances.
MALICIOUS ARREST the arresting of a person on a criminal charge
without probable cause, with knowledge that the person did not
commit the offense charged. See malicious prosecution. Compare false
arrest.
MALICIOUS MISCHIEF see criminal mischief.
MALICIOUS PROSECUTION an action for recovery of damages that
have resulted to person, property or reputation from previous
unsuccessful civil or criminal proceedings that were prosecuted without
probable cause and with malice. See also false arrest.
EXAMPLE: Avril wants to persuade her estranged husband Eugenio to pay
her generous alimony and child support. She contrives a story, which
she tells the local prosecutor, connecting Eugenio with child abuse. Her
misuse of the criminal process is an example of malicious prosecution,
for which Eugenio may be able to sue her.
MALPRACTICE a professional’s improper or immoral conduct in the
performance of his or her duties, done either intentionally or through
carelessness or ignorance; commonly applied to physicians, surgeons,
dentists, lawyers and public officers to denote negligent or unskillful
performance of duties where professional skills are obligatory on
account of the fiduciary relationship with patients or clients.
MALUM IN SE (ma*’-lu*m ĭn sa@) Lat.: evil in itself. Evil, as adjudged by a
civilized community; refers to an act or case involving conduct
punishable because of the nature of the conduct, not only because the
law has declared it punishable. Compare malum prohibitum.
MALUM PROHIBITUM (ma*’-lu*m pro@-hĭ’-bĭ-tu@m) Lat.: wrong because it
is prohibited. Made unlawful by statute for the public welfare, but not
inherently evil and not involving moral turpitude. Compare malum in
se.
MANAGEMENT COMPANY see closed-end management company.
MANDAMUS Lat.: we command. An extraordinary writ, issued from a
court to an official, compelling performance of an act that the law
recognizes as an absolute duty, as distinct from acts that may be at the
official’s discretion.
EXAMPLE: A state legislature passes a law that provides that, upon
request, a person has the right to see any information the government
has on file for that person. Kathy files such a request with the State’s
Attorney General and is refused access to her information. Unless the
refusing party can show some compelling need for secrecy, a court will
issue a writ of mandamus to the holder of the records, directing the
release of the information.
See ministerial act.
MANDATE a judicial command; 1. an official mode of communicating the
judgment of the appellate court to the lower court; 2. a bailment of
something for the performance of some gratuitous service with respect
to it by the bailee.
MANDATORY INJUNCTION see injunction [MANDATORY INJUNCTION].
MANDATORY SENTENCING see sentence [MANDATORY SENTENCE].
MANDATUM in civil law, a bailment, in which the bailee performs
services without recompense.
MANIFEST WEIGHT see against the [manifest] [weight of the]
evidence.
MANIPULATION under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, refers to
practices that are intended to mislead investors by artificially affecting
market activity. Such practices include WASH SALES or MATCHED
ORDERS, i.e., buy and sell orders of substantially the same size at the
same time to create a false impression of active trading, or RIGGED
ORDERS. See also wash sale.
MANN ACT a federal statute prohibiting the transportation of a woman or
girl in interstate or foreign commerce for the purpose of prostitution,
debauchery or any other immoral purpose; also known as the WHITE
SLAVE TRAFFIC ACT.
MANSLAUGHTER unlawful killing of another person without malice
aforethought; distinguished from murder with possible attendant
death penalty; an explainable, less extreme homicide. Most
jurisdictions distinguish between voluntary and involuntary
manslaughter. VOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER is intentional killing
committed under circumstances that, although they do not justify the
homicide, reduce its evil intent. A charge of manslaughter is appropriate
where the defendant killed the victim in rage, terror or desperation.
INVOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER consists of a homicide resulting from
criminal negligence or recklessness.
UNLAWFUL ACT MANSLAUGHTER occurs when someone dies as the result
of the defendant’s doing of an unlawful act, usually a misdemeanor. The
unlawful act referred to can be any act prohibited by law. Unlawful acts
which are malum in se, and which cause a death, constitute involuntary
manslaughter. Unlawful acts that are malum prohibitum and have
death as a foreseeable consequence of committing the act also constitute
involuntary manslaughter. Thus, misdemeanor-manslaughter is
analogous to felony-murder. Many states have been leaning towards
the abolition of the unlawful act doctrine.
MARGIN the payment, a percentage of purchase cost, that a buyer of
regulated securities must make when buying on credit from a
stockbroker.
MARIJUANA [MARIHUANA] see controlled substance [CANNABIS].
MARITAL AGREEMENT see postnuptial agreement; prenuptial
agreement; separation agreement.
MARITAL COMMUNICATIONS PRIVILEGE [HUSBAND-WIFE
[SPOUSAL] PRIVILEGE] principle that either spouse is precluded
from disclosing a confidential communication (oral, written, or
expressive action) made by one to the other. The privilege is only valid
during a legal marriage and communications made before the marriage
or after the marriage terminates are not protected. However, those
communications made during the marriage continue to be protected
even after divorce or death. Its purpose is to preserve the marital status
and to encourage free and open communication and confidence between
spouses. Numerous courts have held that the privilege does not apply to
persons living together without being married nor to those in a
bigamous marriage. The privilege does not apply if third persons are
present whether or not such presence was known to the spouses unless
the third party lacks the capacity to be a witness. A presumption does
exist that the communication was confidential. Where a spouse or child
is the victim of a crime by the other spouse, the privilege does not apply
as to that crime. The privilege belongs to the spouse against whom
testimony is offered and while it may be waived, many courts feel both
spouses, not merely the spouse making the communication, must
consent for a valid waiver. The privilege applies in a family therapy or
marital counseling setting in a manner similar to the physician-patient
privilege to protect communications made in a therapeutic environment.
This privilege should apply in states that allow civil unions. Compare
spousal disqualification.
MARITAL DEDUCTION an ESTATE TAX (see tax) deduction permitting a
spouse to take, tax free, up to one half the value of the decedent
spouse’s total estate. The marital deduction thus permits property to
pass to the surviving spouse without being depleted by the federal estate
tax; enacted for all to have tax treatment similar to that enjoyed by
surviving spouses in the several community property states, where one
half of the decedent’s gross estate was presumed by law to already
belong to the surviving spouse and hence was not subject to an estate
tax.
MARITAL ESTATE [PROPERTY] property acquired by spouses during
the marriage. Division of the property upon dissolution of the marriage
is decided by the court unless a marital agreement exists. See
community property; equitable distribution.
MARITIME JURISDICTION see admiralty and maritime jurisdiction.
MARITIME LAW the traditional body of rules and practices related to
business transacted at sea or to navigation, ships, seamen, harbors and
general maritime affairs. It is, and always has been a body of law
separate from every other jurisprudence. See admiralty and maritime
jurisdiction; admiralty courts.
MARKETABLE TITLE one that a reasonably well-informed purchaser
would, in the exercise of ordinary business prudence, be willing to
accept. A title, to be marketable, need not be free from every technical
criticism, but it must be demonstrated to be reasonably free of
encumbrances. See good title.
MARKET MAKERS see over-the-counter market [MARKET MAKERS].
MARKET ORDER see order [MARKET ORDER].
MARKET PRICE price established by public sales or sales in the way of
ordinary business; figure fixed by sales in ordinary business
transactions, established when other property of the same kind and in
the same or comparable location has been bought or sold in so many
instances that such value may reasonably be inferred. This price is
based on a theoretical transaction between a free seller and buyer
dealing at arm’s length. This term is synonymous with ACTUAL
VALUATION, ACTUAL VALUE, MARKET VALUE, and FAIR VALUE. In
determining a buyer’s damages for nondelivery or repudiation of goods,
market price is determined as of the place for tender or, in cases of
rejection after arrival or revocation of acceptance, as of the place of
arrival.
MARKET VALUE the price that property would bring in a market of
willing buyers and willing sellers, in the ordinary course of trade.
Market value is generally established, if possible, on the basis of sales
of similar property in the same locality. Market value is generally
regarded as synonymous with ACTUAL VALUE, CASH VALUE, and FAIR
MARKET VALUE. See book value.
MARRIAGE a voluntary union of two persons for life (or until divorce);
the union is solemnized in accordance with local law by a wedding
ceremony and the filing of a certificate of marriage. A license is
required before a marriage can be performed. Such license can only be
obtained after medical testing of the couple and, in the case where either
party is a minor, by consent of a parent. The Supreme Court has held
that the freedom to marry has long been recognized as one of the vital
personal rights essential to the orderly pursuit of happiness. The
common law recognized a marital status from a period of cohabitation
between two people but such common-law marriages are no longer
recognized as valid in most jurisdictions. See civil union; domestic
partnership. Compare bigamy.
MARRIED WOMEN’S ACTS see tenancy [TENANCY BY THE ENTIRETY].
MARSHAL 1. an officer of the peace, appointed by authority of a city or
borough, to answer calls within the general duties of a constable or
sheriff, 2. an officer in each federal district who performs the same
duties as sheriffs do for states.
MARSHALING [MARSHALLING] arranging or ranking in order.
MARSHALING ASSETS a rule of ranking assets of a debtor that seeks
equitable distribution of those assets among as many claims as possible
according to the equities of the parties. Courts of equity sometimes
invoke the rule to compel a creditor, who has the right to satisfy his or
her debt out of either of two funds, to resort to the fund that will not
interfere with the rights of another creditor who has recourse to only
one of these funds.
EXAMPLE: When Triad Corporation goes bankrupt, it owes money to both
secured and unsecured creditors. The secured creditors have priority
claims over specific property, while the unsecured creditors get paid
only after all secured creditors are paid. One of the secured creditors has
a claim on Triad’s computers. If that creditor now wants to satisfy its
debt with something other than the computers and that action will
adversely affect the unsecured creditors, a court might apply the rule of
marshaling assets to force that creditor to take the computers. Under
that rule, both types of creditors have a better chance of having their
claims satisfied.
MARSHALING LIENS doctrine whereby one claiming a lien against two or
more classes of property, one of which is also subject to a junior lien, a
lien inferior to another, will be required to exact satisfaction from the
property not subject to the junior lien. Thus, the junior lien is preserved
where other assets exist sufficient to satisfy the senior lien.
MARSHALING REMEDIES where one creditor has security on two funds of
his debtor, and another creditor has security for his debt on only one of
those funds, the latter has a right in equity to compel the former to resort
to the other fund, if such an action is necessary for the satisfaction of
both creditors, provided it will not prejudice the rights or interests of the
party entitled to the double fund, nor do injustice to the common debtor,
nor operate inequitably on the interests of other persons.
Probate courts marshall assets to meet the stated wishes of a testator
(testatrix) in a will when appointed property (property disposed of in the
will by power of appointment) would, because of technical
impediments, pass into an inappropriate residuary clause rather than be
distributed as intended by the testator. Marshaling of assets in probate
courts to achieve this objective is also called SELECTIVE ALLOCATION.
MARTIAL LAW law of military necessity, where the military exercises
great control over civilian affairs, generally because of war or civil
insurrection. When instituted, martial law represents the unchecked will
of the commander, controlled only by consideration of strategy and
policy. In America, the President, as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed
Forces, would assume unreviewable discretion were martial law
declared. Compare court-martial; military law; separation of
powers.
MARY CARTER AGREEMENT an agreement by the plaintiff to settle
with some of the defendants in a tort case for the payment of specified
damages even if the case is lost by the plaintiff. If the damages awarded
exceed the settled amount, the defendant pays only the agreed upon
amount or a specified percentage of the recovery. The case proceeds to
the jury with all the defendants including the settled defendants who
appear to be active litigants. Some states allow confidential agreements
while others require the information to be disclosed to the jury.
MASSACHUSETTS TRUST a business trust that confers limited liability
on the holders of trust certificates; also called a common law trust, a
voluntary association of investors who transfer contributed cash or other
property to trustees with legal authority to manage the business.
Ownership interest is represented by transferable certificates of
beneficial interest, also called trust certificates, and, less properly,
shares. The business trust is a common form of organization among
real estate investment trusts (REITs).
MASTER [MASTER IN CHANCERY; SPECIAL MASTER] 1. a
judicial officer, often expert in the field with which the litigation is
concerned, appointed by courts of equity to hear testimony and make
reports that, when approved by the presiding judge, become the decision
of the courts; 2. the employer in an employment relationship. See
master and servant.
MASTER AND SERVANT the relationship that develops from an express
or implied employment contract between a master, or employer, and a
servant, or employee. See agent; respondeat superior; servant.
MASTER PLAN a long-term, general outline of a project or governmental
function. For instance, in zoning law, a planning board or zoning
commission will adopt a master plan for an area or a development
project, which will regulate the height, density, and other characteristics
of structures that may be erected.
MATCHED ORDERS see manipulation [MATCHED ORDERS].
MATERIAL necessary, meaningful, pertinent to a given matter. In contract
law, a material breach excuses further performance by the aggrieved
party and can give rise to an action for breach of contract.
EXAMPLE: A contract between Natick, Inc., and a recording company
called for 12 separate shipments of blank CDs. The first three shipments
were defective and were returned to Natick. The recording company
was falling behind in its production schedule when the fourth shipment
arrived and that shipment was also defective. The four defective
shipments constitute a material breach of the contract and permit the
recording company to cancel the contract and perhaps to institute a
lawsuit against Natick as well.
MATERIAL ALTERATION any alteration of a document that changes its
legal effect, i.e., that changes the rights, interests, and obligations of the
parties to the instrument.
MATERIAL BREACH see breach [MATERIAL BREACH].
MATERIAL ISSUE an issue that is of legal consequence or other
importance.
MATERIAL WITNESS see witness [MATERIAL WITNESS].
MATERNAL of the mother; belonging to or coming from the mother.
MATRICIDE the crime of killing one’s mother.
MATRIMONIAL ACTION a lawsuit for the purpose of establishing or
altering the marital status of the parties through an annulment or a
divorce. See custody; equitable [EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION].
MATRIMONIAL COURTS see court [MATRIMONIAL COURTS].
MATTER the substantial facts upon which a claim or defense is based; the
subject of litigation, upon which issue is brought before the court and
joined.
MATTER OF FACT see question of fact.
MATTER OF FIRST IMPRESSION see first impression, case of.
MATTER OF LAW see question of law.
MATURITY the date at which legal rights in something ripen. In the
context of commercial paper [negotiable instruments], it is the time
when the paper becomes due and demandable, that is, the date when an
action can enforce payment.
MAXIMS statements espousing general principles of law; not usually used
to justify a court decision based on law, but frequently used to
determine the equities of a situation.
EXAMPLE: “Equity treats as done what ought to be done”: The court will
order the party to do what he or she should in good conscience already
have done.
“First in time is first in right”: If the claim of two parties is equal, the
first in time is the party who will normally prevail.
MAYHEM the common law felony of maliciously maiming,
dismembering or in any other way depriving another of the use of part
of his body so as to render the victim less able to fight in the king’s
army. Many states today treat mayhem as AGGRAVATED ASSAULT (see
assault).
MCNABB-MALLORY RULE a judicial policy, based on federal law, that
renders incriminating statements not admissible in federal court if
obtained from a suspect held in violation of the speedy arraignment
provisions of federal law. i.e., if there is unreasonable delay in
arraignment. Compare miranda rule [warnings].
MECHANIC’S LIEN see lien [MECHANIC’S LIEN].
MED-ARB mediation or arbitration.
MEDIATE DATA facts from which ultimate facts may be inferred for
purposes of collateral estoppel.
MEDIATELY indirectly; having been deduced from proven facts.
MEDIATION a method of settling disputes outside of a court setting; the
imposition of a neutral THIRD PARTY (see party) to act as a link between
the parties; similar to arbitration and conciliation. See also alternative
dispute resolution. Compare negotiation.
EXAMPLE: Sara and Henry wish to obtain a divorce. Hoping to avoid
undue litigation and emotional trauma, they secure the help of a
professional divorce mediator, who attempts a mediation of their affairs.
MEDIATOR see mediation [MEDIATOR].
MEDICAID see affordable care act [MEDICAID].
MEDICAL EXAMINER see coroner.
MEDICAL EXPENSE see expense [MEDICAL EXPENSE].
MEDICAL JURISPRUDENCE see forensic [FORENSIC MEDICINE].
MEDICAL MARIJUANA the use of marijuana to treat or alleviate
specific conditions or symptoms when prescribed or recommended by a
physician. In states where medical marijuana is decriminalized, the
approved person who obtains the marijuana from a licensed dispensary
(or in some states, grows his or her own) cannot be prosecuted for its
possession if all state regulations for its use are followed.
MEDICARE see affordable care act [MEDICARE].
MEDIGAP see affordable care act [MEDIGAP].
MEETING OF MINDS mutual assent to terms by parties to a contract. A
traditional rule of contract law is that the agreement, to be legally
enforceable, must be accurately expressed within the terms of the
contract the parties create for therein lies the required meeting of the
minds; a hidden intent of either party will not change the agreement as
expressed.
MEGAN’S LAW see registration of offenders [MEGAN’S LAW].
MEMBER BANK a member of the Federal Reserve System.
MEMBER CORPORATION a securities brokerage firm, organized as a
corporation, with at least one member of the New York Stock
Exchange who is a director and a holder of voting stock in the
corporation. See member firm.
MEMBER FIRM a securities brokerage firm organized asa partnership
and having at least one general partner who is a member of the New
York Stock Exchange. See member corporation.
MEMORANDUM 1. an informal record; 2. a brief note, in writing, of
some transaction; 3. an outline of an intended instrument; 4. an
instrument written in concise summary.
MEMORANDUM OF LAW an argument by an advocate in support of his or
her position; like a brief but less formal.
OFFICE MEMORANDUM informal discussion of the merits of a matter
pending in a lawyer’s office; usually written by a law clerk or junior
associate for a senior associate or partner.
MEMORANDUM CHECK see check [MEMORANDUM CHECK].
MENACING see assault.
MENSA ET THORO see divorce [SEPARATION].
MENS REA (me*ns ra@’-aW) Lat.: a guilty state of mind. The mental state
accompanying a forbidden act. Criminal offenses are usually defined
with reference to one of four recognized criminal states of mind: (1)
intent; (2) knowledge; (3) recklessness; (4) gross (criminal) negligence.
In a criminal prosecution, the state must prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the required mental state coexisted with the doing of the
proscribed act. Defenses of insanity, intoxication, and mistake may
either nullify or mitigate the existence of a specific mens rea. Crimes
that are malum prohibitum often do not require any specific mens rea.
These are usually crimes of strict liability. See assault; larceny.
Compare insanity.
MENTAL ANGUISH compensable injury embracing all forms of mental
pain, distinguished from physical pain, including deep grief, distress,
anxiety and fright. See pain and suffering.
MENTAL CRUELTY a ground for divorce, consisting of behavior by one
spouse toward the other that so imperils the mental and physical health
of the other that continuation of the marriage is unbearable.
MERCANTILE LAW the branch of law (often called commercial law)
that deals with rules and institutions of commercial transactions; derived
from the law merchant.
MERCHANT under the Uniform Commercial Code, “a person who deals
in goods of the kind or otherwise by his occupation holds himself out as
having knowledge or skill peculiar to the practice or goods involved in
the transaction or to whom such knowledge or skill may be attributed by
his employment of an agent or broker or other intermediary who by his
occupation holds himself out as having such knowledge or skill.” A
one-time seller who is not engaged in the business of selling goods in
question, or does not hold himself or herself out as a person who deals
in such goods, is not a merchant for purposes of implied warranty.
Merchants include car dealers, producers of remanufactured engines,
manufacturers of mobile homes, and with respect to the leasing of an
apartment, landlords.
A warranty of merchantability will only be implied if the seller is a
merchant with respect to goods of the kind in the contract of sale.
Under the Uniform Commercial Code, risk of loss passes to the
buyer upon his or her receipt of goods only if the seller is a merchant;
otherwise, the risk passes to the buyer on tender of delivery. See
warranty [WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY].
MERCHANTABLE 1. salable; 2. reasonably fit for the purpose for which
an article is manufactured and sold; 3. having at least average quality,
compared to similar products.
MERCHANTABLE TITLE see marketable title.
WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY see warranty [WARRANTY OF
MERCHANTABILITY].
MERCY KILLING see euthanasia [ACTIVE EUTHANASIA].
MERE EVIDENCE RULE a former rule of criminal procedure
prohibiting the seizure of objects of evidential value whether pursuant
to a warrant, or incident to arrest. The rule is no longer in effect and
thus there is no distinction between mere evidence and instrumentalities,
fruits of crime and contraband, in terms of seizure under the
reasonableness standards of the Fourth Amendment. Even private
personal papers may be seized as long as the privilege against selfincrimination is not violated by compelling a person to make a record
or to authenticate the papers by their production.
MERGER 1. in criminal law, the process by which, when a single criminal
act constitutes two offenses, the lesser-included offense merges with
the more serious offense for purposes of conviction and sentence.
2. In the law of corporations, a merger is effected when one
corporation ceases to exist by becoming part of another continuing
corporation. The company that continues to exist retains its name and
identity and acquires the assets, liabilities, franchises and powers of
the corporation that ceases to exist. CONSOLIDATION, by contrast, occurs
when two or more corporations unite to form a new corporation and all
the original corporations cease to exist.
3. Procedurally, merger describes the effect of a judgment in a
plaintiff’s favor. Such a judgment extinguishes the entire claim or
cause of action that was the subject of a former action, so that it
becomes merged in the judgment. Plaintiff is then precluded from
making any further claim that was or could have been part of the action
that has been ended.
4. In the conveyance of real property, once the deed is accepted,
representations and agreements made before delivery of the executed
deed are said to merge with the deed, which is the final expression of
the mutual rights and obligations of the parties, replacing the contract of
sale and other prior understandings.
5. In property law, merger is the absorption of a lesser estate into a
higher estate when the two estates meet in the same person at the same
time, without any intermediate estate separating them. Thus, when a
TENANT FOR YEARS purchases or inherits the reversion in fee simple,
the tenancy terminates in ownership.
EXAMPLE: Irwin has the right to possess and use a farm until his death, at
which time the land passes to his sister. The sister has no desire to farm
or own a country house, so she sells her interest to Irwin. Irwin’s right
of possession until his death merges with the interest he purchases from
his sister to give him full ownership of the land forever. The result is
that Irwin can now dispose of the property in whatever manner he
desires.
Similarly, when the owner of an easement becomes the owner of the
land, the easement is terminated by merging into the possessory
interest.
6. The term also applies to the process by which, since the Statute of
Uses, equitable ownership becomes legal ownership and conveyance of
the former effectively conveys the latter.
CONGLOMERATE MERGER a merger wherein the merged corporations are
neither competitors nor potential or actual customers or suppliers of
each other where there are no economic relationships between the
acquiring and the acquired firm.
GEOGRAPHIC MARKET EXTENSION MERGER a merger between firms that
produce the same or a similar product line but who sell in separate
geographic markets and are not direct rivals.
HORIZONTAL MERGER acquisition of one company by another company
producing the same or a similar product and selling it in the same
geographic market.
MERGER OF PROPERTY INTERESTS merger of a smaller and larger estate
whenever successive vested estates are owned by the same person.
There cannot be a merger if a vested estate intervenes between the two
estates, and, a contingent remainder, which would otherwise be
destroyed by a merger of a life estate and the next vested estate, will not
be destroyed if those two estates are created simultaneously with the
contingent remainder, because that would defeat the intention of the
transferor.
PRODUCT EXTENSION MERGER a merger between firms that are not direct
rivals but that produce products that are functionally related either in
marketing or in production to the other.
PURE CONGLOMERATE MERGER a residual category of mergers in which
all mergers are placed that do not fit anywhere else and in which there
seems to be no functional or meaningful relationship between the firms
involved.
SHORT FORM MERGER a statutory method of merging corporations
without the approval of the shareholders of either corporation, usually
requiring that the corporation desiring the merger own at least 90
percent of the outstanding shares of each class of the other corporation.
VERTICAL MERGER acquisition of one company which buys the products
sold by the acquiring company or which sells the product bought by the
acquiring company.
MERGER CLAUSE see parol evidence [PAROL EVIDENCE RULE].
MERITS the various elements that qualify plaintiff’s right to the relief
sought, or defendant’s right to prevail in his defense.
MESNE intermediate; between two extremes.
MESNE LORD in English law, a lord who held lands under authority of the
King and who then gave others inferior in class to himself the right to
use those lands, and thus became a lord to those grantees. See
feoffment; servitudes.
MESNE PROFITS profits obtained from the land by one without legal right
to the land and who thus curtails the rights of the owner.
METES AND BOUNDS the territorial limits of property expressed by
measuring distances and angles from designated landmarks and in
relation to adjoining properties.
MILITARY JURISDICTION refers to the constitutional setup of three
types of military jurisdiction: military law, which provides for
governing the armed forces in both peace and war; military
government, which is exercised in times of foreign war outside the
United States or in times of rebellion and civil war within states
occupied by rebels, supersedes local law, and is exercised by a military
commander under the authority of the President; and martial law,
which can only be declared by Congress, or by the President for a
temporary period, to be used in time of invasion or insurrection within
the United States where ordinary law no longer adequately secures
public safety and private rights. See court-martial.
MILITARY LAW a statutory code of rules and articles provided by
Congress for the government and discipline of troops. It only applies to
those in military service, but is enforced in both peace and war. See
military jurisdiction. Compare martial law.
CODE OF MILITARY JUSTICE see [UNIFORM] CODE OF MILITARY JUSTICE
(below).
COURT-MARTIAL see court-martial.
COURT OF MILITARY APPEAL the final appellate court that may review
court-martial convictions of any armed service. It is not an Article III
constitutional court but is established by Congress under its power to
raise and regulate the land and naval forces of the United States. Its
decisions are subject to review by the President of the United States.
COURT OF MILITARY REVIEW an intermediate appellate court established
by each branch of the armed forces for purposes of reviewing courtmartial cases.
MILITARY COMMISSION in time of war, a court appointed by a field
commander to try alien enemy combatants for offenses against the laws
of war.
MILITARY COURT OF INQUIRY a board of three or more commissioned
officers that is convened by any person authorized to convene a general
court-martial for the purpose of making an investigation and advising
whether futher proceedings shall be had.
MILITARY GOVERNMENT military jurisdiction established under the
Constitution, superseding local law, and exercised by the military
commander under the direction of the President with the express or
implied sanction of Congress. It is exercised either outside the
boundaries of the United States or in time of rebellion and civil war
within states or districts occupied by rebels. When a military
government exists, any offense against the “law of war” is tried before a
military court. See martial law.
[UNIFORM] CODE OF MILITARY JUSTICE the statute that sets forth
procedures by which the armed forces may enforce discipline within its
ranks. The military justice code establishes a system of courts to try
members of the armed forces for service-related crimes. Service-related
crimes are those committed on military posts, or while wearing a
service uniform, but may extend to “nonmilitary” offenses in
appropriate circumstances. The military courts function as a part of the
executive branch of government, not the judicial branch, and are
specifically exempted from the requirement of a grand jury. The
proceedings of the military courts are not generally subject to review by
the federal courts; however, the federal courts may hear habeas corpus
applications from military prisoners who allege the denial of basic
constitutional rights.
MILITARY WILL a relaxation of formal requirements for wills for
members of the armed services while in actual military service. The will
may be oral or written, sometimes without witnesses, and can be made
by minors. The will is not contingent on the physical condition of the
testator/testatrix at the time the will is made.
MINERAL LEASE see mining [MINING LEASE].
MINER’S INCH unit of measure involved in water rights of the amount of
water passing through a standard opening under a prescribed pressure.
Different states have different rates specified by statute (e.g., 1 miner’s
inch = .02 cu. ft. per sec. in Idaho and .025 cu. ft. per sec. in Arizona).
MINIMUM [MINIMAL] CONTACTS that degree of contact with a
forum state sufficient to maintain a suit there and not offend traditional
notions of fair play and substantial justice which are part of the
constitutional guarantee of due process of law. Such contacts include
transacting business within the forum, advertising within the forum, or
accepting insurance payments from persons within the forum. The
requirement is not met if, for example, a person buys an item outside the
forum and is then injured in the normal use of that item within the
forum.
MINIMUM WAGE minimum hourly wages established by Congress
under the Fair Labor Standards Act to maintain the health, efficiency,
and general well-being of workers. That Act has been held inapplicable
to state and local governments.
MINING the process of extracting valuable natural resources from the
earth including but not limited to gold, silver, diamonds, gas, coal,
uranium, oil, and phosphorus.
LOCATION series of acts required by law to acquire a mining claim.
Public notice of the claim and identification of the parameters of the
land must be given.
MINING CLAIM portion of land appropriated by an individual according
to established rules and allowing for exclusive rights to harvest the
natural resources therein.
MINING LEASE an agreement allowing a lessee the right to enter upon
real property to explore for minerals or other natural resources and, if
found, to extract them from the earth. The lessee pays the lessor rent or
a share of the proceeds. A mining lease differs from an ordinary lease in
that the right exists to take from the soil with only a limited right of
possession of the land incidental thereto, as in an oil or gas lease.
MINISTER a person ordained in conformity to the customs of any
organized religion. To be exempt from military training and service, but
not from registration, under the Universal Military Training and Service
Act, a person must be ordained in accordance with the formalities
required by their religious denomination and preach and teach its
religious tenets as their regular and customary vocation, not merely
irregularly or incidentally.
MINISTERIAL ACT an act performed according to explicit directions
(often embodied in a statute) by a subordinate official, allowing no
judgment or discretion on the part of that official. See mandamus.
MINORITY condition of being under legal age.
MINUTES a transcription or other written record of judicial proceedings.
While the minutes kept by the judge are neither a memorial of the
judgment nor a legally required record, they are legal evidence of the
judgment, and as such they may serve as the foundation for the
correction of errors. Compare transcript.
MIRANDA RULE [WARNINGS] the requirement to inform a person of
his or her privilege against self-incrimination (right to remain silent)
and his or her right to the presence and advice of a retained or appointed
attorney before any custodial interrogation by law enforcement
authorities. Prior to any questioning, the person must also be warned
that any statement he or she does make may be used as evidence against
him or her.
Statements and evidence obtained in violation of this rule, unless
these rights have been knowingly waived (and the evidence voluntarily
provided), are not admissible in the defendant’s criminal trial and are
grounds for federal constitutional challenge to any conviction obtained
thereby.
MISADVENTURE an accidental and unintentional homicide,
distinguished from involuntary manslaughter in that the homicide by
misadventure must be the result of a lawful act unaccompanied by
criminal carelessness or recklessness.
MISAPPLICATION [MISAPPROPRIATION] OF PROPERTY the
conscious illegal use of funds or property for a wrongful purpose;
particularly applies to the acts of a fiduciary [one in a position of trust],
public servants as well as private trustees. The terms can include
misapplication of funds intended for another purpose, e.g., the
misapplication of public money, or the conversion of another’s funds
for one’s own benefit. Compare embezzlement; larceny.
MISAPPROPRIATION see misapplication [misappropriation] of
property.
MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE damage to the rights of one party to an
action that results from errors made by the court during trial and that is
sufficiently substantial to require reversal. Where the appellate court
is seriously doubtful that without committed errors the result in the case
would have been the same, the errors may require a reversal on the
grounds of a miscarriage of justice. See plain error.
MISCEGENATION in America and England, a marriage between a
Caucasian and a member of any of the other races; the mixture of races
in a marriage or cohabitation in a state of adultery or fornication by a
white and a black person.
MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE corrupt misbehavior by an officer in the
exercise of the duties of the office or while acting under color of the
office; includes any act or omission in breach of a duty of public
concern by one who has accepted public office. See bribery.
MISDELIVERY includes both delivery to the wrong party and delivery of
goods damaged by the carrier; failure to deliver goods within the terms
of the bill of lading; a total failure to deliver the goods, or leaving them
at the wrong place, which is also deemed a conversion. In a bailment
for hire, the bailee is held strictly accountable for a misdelivery and is
liable for conversion when such misdelivery occurs. For purposes of
commercial contracts, a delivery pursuant to a forged delivery order is
a misdelivery rather than a theft.
MISDEMEANOR a class of criminal offenses less serious than felonies
and sanctioned by less severe penalties. In a jurisdiction where there
are no felonies, the more serious misdemeanors are called HIGH
MISDEMEANORS. See degree of crime; felony.
MISFEASANCE improper and unlawful execution of an act that in itself is
lawful. Frequently used when a job is done in a way that is not
technically illegal, but is nevertheless mistaken or wrong. Compare
malfeasance; misconduct; nonfeasance.
EXAMPLE: Tamara is distracted when completing her client’s tax return
and makes serious errors. Her filing of the document is misfeasance.
MISJOINDER 1. the improper joining together in one trial of distinct
unrelated counts in a single indictment or complaint; 2. the improper
joining of parties or criminal defendants in a single action. See
joinder.
MISLAID PROPERTY property that the owner has intentionally placed
where he or she can resort to it, but which place is then forgotten.
Compare abandonment; lost property.
EXAMPLE: Oscar inadvertently leaves his briefcase at the train station.
Later that evening, Oscar realizes he no longer has the briefcase and
cannot remember where it is. The briefcase is mislaid property, and
Oscar still has an ownership interest in it. He did not leave the property
where he had no intention of recovering it. In that case the property
would have been abandoned.
MISNOMER a mistake in a person’s name. The MISNOMER RULE, which
affords relief from the statute of limitations, applies when the plaintiff
has sued and served the party he intends to sue but has mistakenly used
the wrong name of the defendant.
MISPRISION OF FELONY in common law, the misdemeanor of
observing the committing of a felony and failing to prevent it, or of
knowing about a felony and failing to disclose its occurrence, or of
concealing the felony without any previous agreement with or
subsequent assistance to the felon as would make the concealer an
accessory before- or after-the-fact. Today, to be guilty of the federal
crime of misprision of felony, in addition to knowing about a felony and
failing to disclose information about it, one must take an affirmative
step to conceal it.
EXAMPLE: Margarita observes a bank robbery taking place at a federally
insured bank. As a believer in the axiom of stealing from the rich to
give to the poor, Margarita not only does not call the police but picks up
a pair of gloves the thieves left behind. Those gloves, which might help
solve the crime, are destroyed by Margarita. That destruction makes
Margarita guilty of the federal crime of misprision of felony.
MISREPRESENTATION See false pretense.
MISTAKE an act or omission arising from ignorance or misconception,
which may, depending upon its character or the circumstances
surrounding it, justify rescission of a contract, or exoneration of a
defendant from tort or criminal liability.
MISTAKE OF FACT mistaken notion as to circumstances, events or facts.
MISTAKE OF LAW ignorance of the legal consequences of one’s conduct,
though he or she may be cognizant of the facts and substance of that
conduct. Compare ignorantia legis non excusat.
MUTUAL [BILATERAL] MISTAKE in commercial law, an error on the part
of both parties regarding the same matter—for example, where both
parties understood that the real agreement was what one party alleges it
to be, but had unintentionally executed a contract that did not express
the true agreement.
EXAMPLE: Otis buys his mother a raincoat for her birthday. The
salesperson tells him that one size fits all and believes that to be the
case. In fact, the particular coat is tailored for a very large person and is
manufactured in several different sizes. The mutual mistake will allow
the sale to be cancelled by Otis even though it was a final sale with no
returns.
UNILATERAL MISTAKE a mistake on the part of only one of the parties.
MISTRIAL a trial that has been terminated and declared void prior to the
jury’s returning a verdict (or the judge’s declaring his or her verdict in
a nonjury trial) because of some extraordinary circumstance (such as
death or illness of a necessary juror or of an attorney), or because of
some fundamental error prejudicial to the defendant that cannot be
cured by appropriate instructions to the jury (such as the inclusion of
highly improper remarks in the prosecutor’s summation), or most
commonly because of the jury’s inability to reach a verdict because it is
hopelessly deadlocked in its deliberations (hung jury). Mistrial does
not result in a judgment for any party, but merely indicates a failure of
trial. Compare double jeopardy.
MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES a set of conditions that, while not
exonerating the accused, might reduce the sentence or the damages
arising from the offense. Compare aggravating circumstances;
defense.
MITIGATION OF DAMAGES 1. a requirement that one injured by
another’s breach of an agreement or tort employ reasonable diligence
and care to avoid aggravating the injury or increasing the damages; 2. a
defendant’s request to the court for a reduction in damages owed to the
plaintiff, a request that the defendant justifies by evidence
demonstrating that the plaintiff is not entitled to the full amount that
might otherwise be awarded.
DUTY TO MITIGATE DAMAGES the rule that in some circumstances one
who is wronged must act reasonably to avoid or limit losses, because he
or she cannot recover damages that could have been avoided.
EXAMPLE: Rusty signs a three-year lease with a landlord but has to move
out of the apartment after one year. For two years, the landlord lets the
apartment stay vacant, even though several people are interested in
renting that specific apartment. When the landlord sues Rusty for rent
due over the two-year period, Rusty will claim that the landlord’s right
to collect should be limited because of the landlord’s failure to mitigate
his damages. In this instance, the landlord may have easily rented the
apartment to another person so that the landlord’s losses, and therefore
his damage claims, would have been greatly reduced. The offset for
rents that could have been collected will be allowed.
MITOCHONDRIAL DNA see DNA testing [MITOCHONDRIAL DNA
[mtDNA]].
MIXED NUISANCE see nuisance [MIXED NUISANCE].
MIXED QUESTION OF LAW AND FACT see question of law [MIXED
QUESTION OF LAW AND FACT].
M’NAGHTEN RULE the common law test of criminal responsibility
under which a person was not responsible for criminal acts and was thus
entitled to an acquittal by reason of insanity if as a result of a mental
disease or defect he or she did not understand what he or she did or that
it was wrong, or if he or she was under a delusion (but not otherwise
insane) that, if true, would have provided a good defense (as where the
defendant thought he or she was acting in self-defense or carrying out
the will of God). This is called the RIGHT AND WRONG TEST because it is
often said that one was not insane under the M’Naghten rule if he or she
could distinguish right from wrong. The test has been criticized as too
restrictive and has been changed in many jurisdictions. See Durham
rule; insanity [M’NAGHTEN RULE].
M.O. see modus operandi.
MOB see organized crime.
MODEL ACTS see uniform laws.
MODEL RULES OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT most recent
pronouncement of rules governing professional conduct of lawyers
recommended by the American Bar Association in 1983 to replace the
Code of Professional Responsibility. Generally consists of rules of
reason prescribing terms for resolving ethical problems that arise from
“conflict between a lawyer’s responsibility to clients, to the legal system
and to the lawyer’s own interest in remaining an upright person while
earning a satisfactory living.” Preamble to the Rules. The adoption of
the Rules recognizes that the legal profession is largely self-governing,
a status that can be maintained only as long as the profession can assure
that its regulations are conceived in the public interest and not in
furtherance of parochial or self-interested concerns of the bar. The
Rules, however, simply provide a framework for the ethical practice of
law. They do not exhaust the moral and ethical considerations that
should guide a lawyer. Moreover, the Rules are not designed to be a
basis for civil liability. Each state body that regulates lawyer conduct
within its jurisdiction is free to adopt all or part of the Rules, or to reject
them.
The Rules address eight separate areas: (1) the client-lawyer
relationship, (2) the lawyer as a counselor, (3) the lawyer as an
advocate, (4) transactions with persons other than lawyers, (5) law firms
and associations, (6) public service, (7) information about legal service,
and (8) maintaining the integrity of the profession.
One of the more controversial rules concerns Confidentiality of
Information, which essentially requires the lawyer to not reveal any
information the client tells to the lawyer, even if that information
concerns the commission of a crime or fraud upon others, except if the
crime is likely to result in imminent death or substantial bodily harm, or
establishes a claim or defense on behalf of the lawyer in a controversy
between the lawyer and client.
MODIFIED ACCELERATED COST RECOVERY SYSTEM see
depreciation [MODIFIED ACCELERATED COST RECOVERY SYSTEM].
MODUS OPERANDI (m@o’-du*s o*p-erW-än’-de@) Lat.: the manner of
operation. The means of accomplishing an act; especially, the
characteristic method employed by defendant in repeated criminal acts.
MOIETY a half; a part.
MOLLITER MANUS IMPOSUIT (mo@’-lĭ-teWr mä’-nu*s ĭmpo@’-zu@-ĭt) Lat.:
the gentle laying upon of hands. In a tort action, the term refers to an
assertion by one of the parties that he or she used only the force
necessary to protect himself or herself or his or her property from injury
by the other party. Compare self-defense.
M-1 [M-2, M-3] see money supply [M-1, M-2, M-3].
MONEY coined metal, usually gold or silver, upon which a government
has impressed its stamp to designate its value. While money was once
limited to “coin of the realm,” in common usage the term refers to any
currency, tokens, bank notes, or the like accepted as a medium of
exchange. Under the Uniform Commercial Code, money is defined as
“a medium of exchange authorized or adopted by a domestic or foreign
government as a part of its currency.” Compare legal tender.
MONEY DEMAND any demand or action arising out of contract, tort, or
statute, express or implied, where the relief demanded is a recovery of
money, and may be enforced by attachment when the amount due is
fixed or can be ascertained.
MONEY HAD AND RECEIVED in early common law pleading, one of
the categories in the action for general assumpsit. The plaintiff declared
that the defendant “had and received certain money.” The other two
related declarations in the same category were “for money lent” and
“for money paid.”
MONEY JUDGMENT a judgment ordering the payment of a sum of
money. Such judgments may be executed under a writ of execution.
MONEY ORDER a credit instrument, either negotiable or nonnegotiable,
calling for payment of money to a named payee, and involving the
payee, drawee, and remitter.
MONEY SUPPLY [M-1, M-2, M-3] the various measures of money used
by the Federal Reserve System. M-1 is currency plus demand deposits or
checking account balances; M-2 is M-1 plus net time deposits other than
large certificates of deposit; M-3 is M-2 plus deposits at nonbank thrift
institutions such as savings and loan associations. Various other
components and combinations are also used.
MONOGAMY see polygamy.
MONOPOLY 1. a market condition where all or so nearly all of an article
of commerce within a district is brought within the control of one
person or company, that competition or free traffic in that article is
excluded. See antitrust laws.
2. a privilege or license granting a group or company sole authority to
deal in certain products, or provide a product or service in a specified
area.
EXAMPLE: Public Utilities Gas Company is granted the exclusive right to
supply gas to the northern part of a state. The right is granted out of
convenience and necessity, since it would be impractical to have several
gas company lines running underground. Moreover, it is desirable to
have the state control pricing of a necessary item for any household. As
a grant by the state, the monopoly in favor of Public Utilities is a lawful
monopoly.
MONTH-TO-MONTH TENANCY see tenancy [PERIODIC TENANCY].
MOOT CASE a case that seeks to determine an abstract question that does
not rest upon existing facts or rights, or that seeks a judgment in a
pretended controversy, or one that seeks a decision about a right before
it has actually been asserted or contested, or a judgment upon some
matter that, when rendered for any cause, cannot have any practical
effect upon the existing controversy. See advisory opinion.
EXAMPLE: Tina files a lawsuit against Private University, claiming that
the university has denied her admission because of her race. Before the
case reaches the trial court. Private admits Tina as a student. Because of
the school’s actions, the case between Tina and Private is rendered
moot. Tina can no longer claim that race was a factor in denying her
admission, since she has been admitted.
MOOT COURT a fictitious court established to argue a moot case. Law
schools form moot courts as an instrument of learning.
MORAL CERTAINTY certainty beyond a reasonable doubt; a
conviction based on persuasive reasons and excluding doubts that a
contrary conclusion can exist. A juror is said to be morally certain of a
fact when he or she would act in reliance upon its truth in matters of
greatest importance to himself or herself.
MORAL CONSIDERATION see consideration [MORAL [EQUITABLE]
CONSIDERATION].
MORAL TURPITUDE vileness or dishonesty of a high degree. A crime
of moral turpitude demonstrates depravity in the private and social
duties a person owes to others, contrary to what is accepted and
customary.
MORATORIUM delay, a period during which certain proceedings or
obligations are suspended. During the pendency of bankruptcy
proceedings, for example, there is a moratorium on the debtor’s
obligation to pay his debts.
MORTGAGE in common law, a conveyance of, or granting of a lien
upon, real property of a debtor to his creditor, intended as a security
for the repayment of a loan, usually the purchase price (or a part
thereof) of the property so conveyed or encumbered. The transfer was
rendered void upon repayment of the loan; i.e., the property reverted to
the debtor upon the discharge of the mortgage by timely payment of the
sum loaned.
TITLE THEORY refers to the modern version of the common law
mortgage under which the creditor has the legal right to possession
(though in fact the debtor remains in possession of his or her property).
Under the HYBRID THEORY the creditor’s right to possession arises only
upon default by the debtor. Under the LIEN THEORY, the mortgagee
(creditor) takes a lien on the property, and is not entitled to possession
until he or she has pursued remedy in foreclosure and the mortgaged
premises have been sold; i.e., the right to possession arises only when
the mortgagor’s (debtor’s) equity of redemption has been foreclosed.
In the mortgage relationship, the debtor is called the mortgagor and the
creditor is called the mortgagee.
ADJUSTABLE RATE MORTGAGE a loan in which the interest rate floats
dependent upon periodic adjustments to an index. Such varying rates
usually start out lower than fixed rates and may or may not have a cap
on the maximum rate. Also called a VARIABLE RATE MORTGAGE.
ASSIGNMENT OF MORTGAGE an agreement transferring mortgage
ownership from one party to another.
ASSUMPTION OF MORTGAGE taking upon oneself the obligations of a
mortgagor towards a mortgagee, generally as part of the purchase price
of a parcel of real estate. By assuming the mortgage rather than taking
subject to the mortgage, the purchaser becomes personally liable on the
debt.
EXAMPLE: Ed wants to buy Kiem’s home for $280,000. He can afford a
$116,000 down payment and is willing to assume Kiem’s $164,000
mortgage. If the bank agrees to the assumption of its mortgage, Ed will
be personally responsible for the mortgage payments. If Ed should
default, the bank can still hold Kiem liable, since he was the original
mortgagor, unless he is released by the bank as part of the assumption.
BALLOON MORTGAGE [NOTE] a promissory note repayable in periodic
installments of a specified amount, usually representing interest, with a
much larger final payment, usually of the entire principal amount, often
called the BALLOON PAYMENT.
BLANKET MORTGAGE a mortgage burdening all of the property present
and future.
CHATTEL MORTGAGE conveyance of a present interest in personal
property, generally as security for payment of money, such as the
purchase price of property, or for the performance of some other act.
Like a mortgage of real property, it operates in some states to pass title
to the mortgagee, but in other states merely to create a lien; but in either
case the mortgagor retains possession. It is thus distinguished from a
pledge, which establishes a bailment and that therefore establishes the
pledgee as bailee and grants him or her possession of the personalty.
CLOSED-END MORTGAGE a mortgage that does not permit additional
borrowing without the consent of the first mortgagee.
DIRECT REDUCTION MORTGAGE one which requires a fixed payment of
principal each period.
EQUITABLE MORTGAGE security transaction that fails to satisfy the legal
requirements of a mortgage but that nevertheless is treated in equity as
a mortgage. It includes cases in which interest in the property in the
hands of the creditor is full legal ownership, and the aid of equity is
necessary to reduce it to a security interest and to establish the rights of
the debtor as a mortgagor. Also included are cases where the transaction
is technically insufficient to create a mortgage at law, but where equity
intervenes to protect the mortgagee.
FIXED RATE MORTGAGE one with an interest rate that does not change.
HOME EQUITY CONVERSION MORTGAGE see REVERSE MORTGAGE
(below).
HOME EQUITY LINE OF CREDIT [HELOC] see home equity line of credit
[HELOC].
LEASE-PURCHASE AGREEMENT [CONTRACT] a rent-to-own arrangement
where the renter’s payments go toward the ultimate purchase of the
property at a pre-determined price. Often used where there is sufficient
income for the monthly payments but no money for a down payment.
The lease substitutes for the mortgage.
LEVEL PAYMENT MORTGAGE see FIXED PAYMENT MORTGAGE (above).
MORTGAGE COMMITMENT (LETTER) a letter provided by a lender to a
borrower legally binding the terms upon which a loan for the purchase
or refinance of real property will be granted.
MOTHER HUBBARD CLAUSE see mother hubbard clause.
PURCHASE MONEY see security interest.
REVERSE MORTGAGE mortgage allowing a homeowner (usually elderly)
to convert existing equity into periodic disbursements or a cash advance
to be repaid with interest when the home is sold, the borrower dies, or a
specified maturity date is reached.
SECOND MORTGAGE a loan with rights secondary to the first loan. A
mortgage without intervening liens between it and the first mortgage;
one which does not contemplate a mortgage on a buyer’s interest in a
land contract.
SENIOR MORTGAGE refers to a FIRST MORTGAGE and not a REVERSE
MORTGAGE (above). It is not reflective of age.
SHARED APPRECIATION MORTGAGE a loan where the borrower gets a
lower than market interest rate in exchange for allowing the lender to
share in the future appreciation of the property.
SUBJECT TO MORTGAGE a condition of sale whereby the purchaser takes
land encumbered by a preexisting mortgage. The purchaser’s obligation
to the mortgagee is limited to the value of the property subject to the
mortgage, unless the purchaser becomes personally liable on the debt by
assuming the mortgage. See ASSUMPTION OF MORTGAGE (above)
SUBPRIME MORTGAGE (generally with an adjustable interest rate and
often little or no down payment) is one offered to borrowers with low
credit ratings. Higher interest rates are charged due to the greater risk of
loan default.
SUBPRIME MORTGAGE CRISIS began around 2006, when declining house
prices and rising adjustable rates led to the inability of borrowers to
refinance and resulted in dramatic numbers of foreclosures. Banking
institutions lost huge amounts of their investments and responded by
tightening credit, leading to a global economic crisis.
TITLE THEORY see earlier in entry (above).
VARIABLE RATE MORTGAGE see ADJUSTABLE RATE MORTGAGE (above).
WRAPAROUND MORTGAGE in real estate law, a second mortgage which
allows the borrower to take advantage of a low interest first mortgage
without being subject to the usual cash flow demands of carrying both a
first and second mortgage. The face amount of the wraparound
mortgage is the amount due on the first mortgage plus the amount due
on the second mortgage. Annual payments are computed on this
combined amount, and are applied to satisfy the payments due on the
first mortgage before being applied to the wraparound mortgage. The
wraparound mortgage is frequently used in the purchase and sale of
realty when the seller’s mortgage is at more advantageous terms than
financing available to the buyer.
MORTGAGE COMMITMENT (LETTER) see mortgage [MORTGAGE
COMMITMENT (LETTER)].
MORTGAGEE the party lending the money to a mortgagor, who takes a
security interest in property owned by the mortgagor.
MORTGAGE MARKET origination of mortgage loans in the primary
mortgage market and resale of mortgages in the secondary mortgage
market, especially mortgage certificates that are bond-like securities
backed by blocks of mortgage loans. Primary origination is conducted
by mutual savings banks, savings and loan associations, mortgage
bankers, commercial banks, and insurance companies. The same
institutions are active in the secondary market with mortgage certificate
issues directed to the general public and traditional investment groups
such as pension funds. Mortgage loans represent first liens on real estate
property that, unlike bonds, require periodic payment (usually monthly)
of both principal and interest over the term of the mortgage. The federal
government has assumed a major economic role in the mortgage loan
market because real estate development is a major sector of the U.S.
economy. The Federal Housing Authority and the Veterans
Administration promote primary mortgage originations by guaranteeing
home mortgages. The Government National Mortgage Association
(known as GINNIE MAE) and the Federal National Mortgage Association
(known as FANNIE MAE) promote the secondary mortgage market in
government-insured loans. The Federal Home Loan Bank Board
regulates savings banks, which are the primary originators of home
mortgages, and promotes the secondary market in government-insured
mortgages, privately insured mortgages and conventional uninsured
mortgages.
MORTGAGOR the party borrowing money from a bank or other lending
agency, who secures the loan with property the party owns in whole or
in part.
MORTIS CAUSA see cause [CAUSA MORTIS].
MORTMAIN literally, dead hand; applies to all property that, from the
nature of the purposes to which it is devoted, or the character of the
ownership to which it is subjected, is for every practical purpose not
freely alienable.
MOST FAVORED NATION CLAUSE in international law, a clause in a
treaty by which each signatory country grants to the other the broadest
rights and privileges that it accords to any other nation in treaties it has
made or will make.
MOTHER HUBBARD CLAUSE 1. mortgage clause allowing that in the
event of a default, the lender may foreclose not only on that mortgage
but also any other loans made between the same parties. It is also
known as an ANDACONDA CLAUSE or DRAGNET CLAUSE. 2. in oil and gas
leases, refers to small pieces of land that might be left out of the
property description but are included in the lease, such as a ditch or
small areas missed by surveyors. As such, it is considered an “allinclusive” or “catch-all” provision.
MOTION an application to the court requesting an order in favor of the
applicant. Motions are generally made in reference to a pending action
and may be addressed to a matter within the discretion of the judge, or
may concern a point of law. Motions may be made orally or, more
formally, in writing.
MOTION FOR JUDGMENT a motion admitting an agreed-upon statement of
facts that leaves the dominant issue in the case as one of a matter of
law, thereby relegating the issue for a determination by the court rather
than by a jury. See judgment [JUDGMENT NOTWITHSTANDING THE
VERDICT]; summary judgment.
MOTION IN ARREST OF JUDGMENT application made by defendant to
withhold judgment after verdict. The motion, like a demurrer, must
point out some fatal defect arising as a matter of law from the record.
MOTION IN ERROR same as writ of error, except no notice to opponent is
required, because both parties are before the court when a motion in
error is made.
MOTION IN LIMINE a motion used to exclude reference to anticipated
evidence claimed to be objectionable until the admissibility of the
questionable evidence can be determined either before or during the
trial by presenting to the court, out of the presence of the jury, offers and
objections to the evidence. The motion seeks to avoid injection into trial
of irrelevant, inadmissible, or prejudicial evidence at any point,
including the voir dire examinations, opening statements, and direct
and cross-examinations, and therefore prevents mistrials based on
evidentiary irregularities.
MOTION TO SET ASIDE JUDGMENT exactly like MOTION IN ARREST OF
JUDGMENT (above), except that while a motion to arrest must be made
during term of court which renders judgment, a motion to set aside
judgment can be made at any time within the applicable statute of
limitations. Both motions must be based on a legal defect appearing on
the face of the record.
MOTOR VEHICLE CODE see code.
MOVANT the moving party; applicant for an order by way of motion
before a court.
MOVE to make a motion; in practice, to make application to a court or
other tribunal for a ruling, order or particular relief.
mtDNA see DNA testing [MITOCHONDRIAL DNA [mtDNA]].
MULCT a fine or penalty imposed for an offense; a forfeiture.
MULIER legitimate child.
MULTIFARIOUS refers to a suit where independent matters are
improperly joined and thereby confused; also refers to misjoinder of
causes of action and misjoinder of parties in a suit.
MULTIPARTITE consisting of two or more parts or parties, as where
several nations join in a treaty.
MULTIPLICITY OF ACTIONS [SUITS] the existence of several
separate actions at law brought against the same defendant to litigate
the same right. In the exercise of its equity powers, a court can enjoin
the proceedings at law and hear all of the claims at a single proceeding.
A mere multitude of suits is not sufficient to invoke this remedy. Rather,
the court must find that the remedy at law is not sufficient and that the
proceedings will be vexatious for the defendant and wasteful for the
courts. Class action suits are permitted as an attempt to alleviate this
problem. See litigious; malicious prosecution.
MUNICIPAL BOND a bond issued by a state or local government body
such as a county, city or town.
MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS usually incorporated cities, towns and
villages having subordinate and local powers of legislation. The term is
sometimes used in a broader sense to include every corporation formed
for governmental purposes, so as to embrace counties, townships,
school districts and other governmental subdivisions of the state.
MUNICIPAL COURT city court that administers the law within the city.
These courts generally have exclusive jurisdiction over violations of
city ordinances and may also have jurisdiction over minor criminal
cases arising within the city and over certain civil cases.
MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE a law of local application, whose violation is
an offense against the city enacting it. See ordinance.
MURDER unlawful killing of another human being with premeditated
intent or malice aforethought.
FIRST DEGREE MURDER unlawful killing that is deliberate and
premeditated.
SECOND DEGREE MURDER unlawful killing of another with malice
aforethought but without deliberation and premeditation. Such malice
may be in the form of express malice as the actual intention to kill, or of
implied malice where there is no intent, but where death is caused by an
act that discloses such a reckless state of mind as to be equivalent to an
actual intent to kill.
EXAMPLE: Tom becomes very angry at his business partner, Kaz, and
throws a brick at him. Since Tom intended to hurt Kaz, if death results
the act will be second degree murder. If the provocation was sufficient,
the crime might be reduced by the jury to manslaughter. If Tom planned
the attack on Kaz and intended to inflict grievous injury, it might be first
degree murder.
See also homicide; manslaughter.
MUTE see standing mute.
MUTINY to rise against lawful or constituted authority, particularly in the
naval or military service. At sea, an attempt to usurp command of a
vessel from its master. Includes resisting a federal warden or
subordinate officers in the free and lawful exercise of their legal
authority.
MUTUAL COVENANTS see covenant [INDEPENDENT [MUTUAL]
COVENANTS].
MUTUAL FUND an investment company that sells its own shares to
investors and then invests the proceeds from that sale in other securities,
thus affording its investors a diversified portfolio. OPEN-END MUTUAL
FUNDS do not have a fixed capitalization and may issue new shares on a
customer-demand basis. CLOSED-END MUTUAL FUNDS do have a fixed
capitalization and may sell only as many shares as were authorized in
the first instance.
MUTUAL FUND SHARE a security reflecting an undivided ownership in
a mutual fund company that is not traded by the shareholders but is
redeemable upon its request.
MUTUALITY OF ESTOPPEL see estoppel [MUTUALITY OF ESTOPPEL].
MUTUALITY OF OBLIGATION responsibilities imposed on each of the
parties to a contract, which must be mutual and by which each must be
bound. Unless each party is bound to perform in some way, the
agreement will lack consideration.
MUTUALITY OF REMEDY a doctrine that one party should not obtain
from equity that which the other party could not obtain. Accordingly,
whenever a contract is incapable of being specifically enforced against
one party because of the personal nature of the contract, that party
cannot specifically enforce it against the other.
MUTUAL MISTAKE see mistake [MUTUAL [BILATERAL] MISTAKE].
N
NAKED POWER see power of appointment [NAKED POWER].
NALA see National Association of Legal Assistants [NALA].
NALP see National Association of Legal Professionals [NALP].
NALS see National Association of Legal Secretaries [NALS].
NAMED INSURED the party who contracts for insurance and who is
named in the policy. It sometimes happens that one who is a named
insured has a claim in tort against another who is an additional insured
under the policy. For example, the owner of an insured automobile may
lend it to another whose operation of the vehicle injures the owner (the
named insured).
NARCOTICS see controlled substances [NARCOTICS].
NASD see National Association of Securities Dealers [NASD].
NASDAQ the national automated quotation service for over-the-counter
securities. Operation is supervised by the National Association of
Securities Dealers [NASD] and input is provided by hundreds of overthe-counter market makers. NASDAQ is an acronym for National
Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations.
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF LEGAL ASSISTANTS [NALA] a
national organization of paralegals and legal assistants providing
continuing education, job placement, and professional certification. Use
of CLA (Certified Legal Assistant) after a name indicates the receipt of
certification through NALA.
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF LEGAL PROFESSIONALS [NALP]
a national organization of legal secretaries providing continuing
education, professional certification, and job placement.
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF LEGAL SECRETARIES [NALS] see
National Association of Legal Professionals [NALP].
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF SECURITIES DEALERS [NASD] a
body empowered by the Securities and Exchange Commission to
regulate over-the-counter market brokers and dealers. It is charged to
adopt, adminster, and enforce rules of fair practice and rules to prevent
fraudulent and manipulative acts and practices, and in general to
promote just and equitable principles of trade for the protection of
investors. It publishes quotations for national and regional over-thecounter transactions and supervises operation of NASDAQ, the national
automated quotation service for over-the-counter stocks.
NATIONAL CRIME INFORMATION CENTER see NCIC.
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS ACT comprehensive federal law that
regulates the relations of employers and establishes the National Labor
Relations Board. See labor organization [union].
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD [NLRB] an independent
agency created by Congress that oversees relationships between unions
and employees. The Board has the power to adjudicate claims before it
and to enforce its judgments in the federal courts. See labor
organization [union].
NATIONAL LAWYERS GUILD an association of lawyers, law students,
legal workers, and jailhouse lawyers dedicated to the need for basic
change in the political and economic system of the country. It actively
seeks to eliminate racism and to maintain and protect civil rights and
civil liberties. It was founded in 1937 as a progressive alternative to the
American Bar Association.
NATIVE AMERICAN LAW see Indian law.
NATIVE FILE original, unaltered computer file.
NATURAL CHILD any child by birth as opposed to an adopted child.
Compare adoption.
NATURALIZED CITIZEN one who, having been born in another country
or otherwise reared as a foreigner, has been granted U.S. citizenship and
the rights and privileges of that status. The process by which such a
person attains citizenship is called NATURALIZATION. See citizen.
Compare alien; legal permanent resident.
NATURAL LAW law that so necessarily agrees with the nature of human
beings, that without observing its maxims, the peace and happiness of
society cannot be preserved; that law, knowledge of which may be
attained merely by the light of reason, and from the facts of its essential
connection with human nature. Natural law exists regardless of whether
it is enacted as positive law. See positivism.
NATURAL LAW THEORY in jurisprudence, the view that the nature and
value of any legal order is best understood by studying how the positive
law of that legal order agrees or contrasts with natural law.
NATURAL PERSON a human being, as opposed to an artificial or
fictitious person such as a corporation.
NATURE, ACT OF see act of God [nature; providence].
NAVIGABLE WATERS within meaning of congressional acts, when
waters form (in their ordinary condition by themselves or by uniting
with other waters) a continued highway over which commerce is or may
be carried on with other states or foreign countries in customary modes
in which such commerce is conducted by water. See admiralty and
maritime jurisdiction.
N.B. see nota bene.
NCIC National Crime Information Center. Computerized records used by
law enforcement agencies to determine criminal records, arrest or
bench warrants, or stolen vehicles and guns.
NECESSARY AND PROPER CLAUSE constitutional provision, U.S.
Constitution, Art. I, Sec. 8, Cl. 18, empowering Congress to make all
laws that shall be “necessary and proper” for carrying into execution the
enumerated powers of Congress. The phrase is not limited to such
measures as are absolutely necessary, but includes all appropriate means
that are conducive to the end to be accomplished, and that in the
judgment of Congress, will most advantageously effect it. The clause is
not a grant of power but a declaration that Congress possesses all the
means necessary to carry out its specifically granted powers.
NECESSARY IMPLICATION see implication [NECESSARY
IMPLICATION].
NECESSARY INFERENCE deduced fact that is unavoidable from the
standpoint of reason, so that no other inference may be reasonably
drawn from the facts as stated.
EXAMPLE: Cody is in a maximum security prison when a robbery occurs
in a local jewelry store. Several witnesses to the robbery are shown
pictures of criminals at police headquarters, and one of those witnesses
identifies Cody as the robber. Cody cannot be charged because there is a
necessary inference that he could not have committed the robbery in
town while an inmate at a maximum security prison.
Compare presumption.
NECESSARY PARTY see party [NECESSARY PARTY].
NECESSITY, DEFENSE OF see justification.
NE EXEAT (ne@e*x’-e@-a*t) Lat.: do not leave. An order (sometimes called a
writ) forbidding a person from leaving the court’s jurisdiction unless a
suitable surety, such as a bond, is posted.
NEGATIVE AVERMENT an averment in some of the pleadings in which
a negative is asserted. Generally a party need not prove a negative
averment, but the point in issue is to be proved by the party who asserts
the affirmative.
NEGATIVE EASEMENT see easement [NEGATIVE EASEMENT].
NEGATIVE PREGNANT in pleading, a denial that implies an affirmation
of a substantial fact and hence is beneficial to the opponent. Thus, when
only a qualification or modification is denied while the fact itself
remains undenied, the denial is pregnant with an affirmation of that fact.
LITERAL DENIAL If the complaint alleges that the defendant was at the
bar on July 5th and the defendant denies that he was at the bar on July
5th, this would be an admission that he may have been at the bar on July
3rd or July 7th (or any other date).
CONJUNCTIVE DENIAL If the complaint alleges that the defendant injured
the plaintiff by kicking and slapping and punching and the defendant
denies that he was kicking and slapping and punching, this would
constitute an admission that he was guilty but in a combination less than
all three. Instead, the defendant should have responded in the
disjunctive by denying that he was kicking or slapping or punching.
NEGLECT the omission of proper attention; avoidance or disregard of
duty from heedlessness, indifference, or willfulness; failure to do, use,
or heed anything; negligence, as neglect of business, of health, or of
economy. See excusable neglect.
NEGLIGENCE failure to exercise a degree of care that a person of
ordinary prudence (a reasonable man) would exercise under the same
circumstances. The term refers to conduct that falls below the standard
established by law for the protection of others against unreasonable risk
of harm.
COMPARATIVE NEGLIGENCE the proportionate sharing between plaintiff
and defendant of responsibility for injury to the plaintiff based on the
relative negligence of the two. It results in a reduction of the damages
recoverable by the negligent plaintiff in proportion to his fault.
EXAMPLE: Adib runs across a busy street at a point between two trucks,
so that both his vision and the vision of other vehicles is impaired. A car
travels down the street over the speed limit, but not excessively fast, and
hits Adib. A jury finds Adib 30 percent responsible for the accident and
the driver 70 percent. Under a comparative negligence theory, if Adib
would have normally recovered $10,000 in damages, he now only
recovers $7,000.
CONCURRENT NEGLIGENCE the wrongful acts or omissions of two or
more persons acting independently but causing the same injury. The
independent actions do not have to occur at the same time, but must
produce the same result. The actors are all responsible for paying the
damages and can usually be sued together in one lawsuit or individually
in separate lawsuits.
CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE conduct on the part of the plaintiff that
falls below the standard to which he or she should conform for his or
her own protection, and that is a legally contributing cause cooperating
with the negligence of the defendant in bringing about the plaintiff’s
harm. In common law, the plaintiff’s contributory negligence precludes
his or her right to recover from the defendant.
EXAMPLE: On the same facts as in the example under comparative
negligence, if the jurisdiction Adib sues in follows a theory of
contributory negligence, Adib’s fault will prevent any recovery against
the other driver since Adib’s negligence contributed to his injury.
CRIMINAL [CULPABLE] NEGLIGENCE such negligence as is necessary to
incur criminal liability. In most jurisdictions, culpable negligence is
more than the ordinary negligence necessary to support a civil action
for damages. Thus, culpable negligence is a reckless disregard of
consequences or a heedless indifference to the personal safety of others.
GROSS NEGLIGENCE an intentional or willful failure to perform a clear
duty, recklessly disregarding the consequences of injury to person or
property that attend such failure.
NEGLIGENCE PER SE negligence as a matter of law; an act or omission
recognized as negligent either because it is contrary to the requirements
of law or because it is so opposed to the dictates of common prudence
that one could say without doubt that no careful person would have
committed the act or omission. While negligence ordinarily must be
found by the trier of fact (see fact finder) from the facts and
circumstances disclosed by the evidence, negligence per se arises from
a violation of a specific requirement of law or ordinance, the only fact
for determination by the trier of fact being the omission or commission
of the specific act prohibited or required.
RECKLESS NEGLIGENCE see WANTON NEGLIGENCE (below).
WANTON NEGLIGENCE an intentional act of an unreasonable character in
disregard of a risk known, or so obvious that it must have been known,
and so great as to make it highly probable that harm would follow. The
act is usually accompanied by a conscious indifference to the
consequences amounting almost to willingness that they shall follow.
The term “wanton” is used synonymously with willful and reckless. The
result is that wanton, willful, or reckless conduct tends to take on the
aspect of highly unreasonable conduct, or an extreme departure from
ordinary care in a situation where a high degree of danger is apparent.
WILLFUL NEGLIGENCE see WANTON NEGLIGENCE (above).
NEGLIGENT INFLICTION OF EMOTIONAL DISTRESS see
emotional distress [NEGLIGENT INFLICTION OF EMOTIONAL DISTRESS].
NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT a writing signed by the maker or
drawer, containing an unconditional promise or order to pay a specific
sum, payable on demand or at a definite time, and payable to order or
to bearer. A draft, check, certificate of deposit and note may or may
not be negotiable instruments, depending upon whether the elements of
negotiability are satisfied.
EXAMPLE: Mickey takes a loan from a bank and signs a promissory note
to repay the bank in twelve months. That note is a negotiable instrument
and can be transferred by that bank to any other party. Because it is
freely transferable, Mickey does not repay the note unless he knows
who possesses it, and demands that, upon payment, the note be returned
to him so that it is not transferred to another party.
An ordinary check issued by an employer to an employee or by a
customer to a store is also a negotiable instrument.
NEGOTIABLE ORDER OF WITHDRAWAL [NOW] see bank
[NEGOTIABLE ORDER OF WITHDRAWAL [NOW]].
NEGOTIATION a method of dispute resolution where either the parties
themselves or the representatives of each party attempt to settle
conflicts without resort to the courts; an impartial third party is not
involved. Compare arbitration; mediation.
NEMO EST SUPRA LEGIS (na@’-mo@e*st su@’-praW la@-gĭs) Lat.: nobody is
above the law.
NET ASSET VALUE an accounting term similar in meaning to book
value and net worth; most often used in reference to value of mutual
fund shares and similar investment companies. Investment companies
compute their net asset value at the end of each market day by taking
the total market value of securities, cash, etc., owned, less any
liabilities. See balance sheet.
NET ESTATE estate that under federal and state statutes is subject to an
estate tax; generally that estate remaining after all debts of decedent,
funeral and administrative expenses, and other deductions prescribed by
law have been subtracted from the GROSS ESTATE (total valuation of the
estate’s assets at decedent’s death). The term thus refers generally to
that estate left to be distributed after all deductions have been made.
NET INCOME the gross [total] income less the deductions and
exemptions allowed by law.
NET LEASE see lease [NET LEASE].
NET OPERATING LOSS the excess of allowable deductions over GROSS
INCOME (see income) with certain specific adjustments set forth in the
Internal Revenue Code, which are generally designed to limit the net
operating loss deductions of individual taxpayers to business losses. A
net operating loss reduces the TAXABLE INCOME (see income) of the
taxpayer for the taxable year by the amount of such net operating loss.
NET WORTH one of several methods used by the Internal Revenue
Service to reconstruct a taxpayer’s income when it is determined that
either the taxpayer has failed to file a return or the tax liability shown is
not correct. Under this method the taxpayer’s net worth for the start of
the period in question is determined, and his or her net worth at the end
of the period is also calculated, with the difference, less any nontaxable
amounts received, deemed to be the taxpayer’s income for the period.
This approach is often used in cases involving suspected evasion by the
taxpayer, but it is also used in normal civil or civil fraud contexts.
NEUTRALITY LAWS laws governing a country’s abstention from
participating in a conflict or aiding a participant of such conflict, and the
duty of participants to refrain from violating the territory, seizing the
possession, or hampering the peaceful commerce of the neutral
countries. For example, the Neutrality Act of 1939 was passed by
Congress for the purpose of preserving the neutrality of the United
States and averting the risks that brought the United States into World
War I.
NEWLY DISCOVERED EVIDENCE evidence in existence at the time
of trial of which a party was unaware. Newly discovered evidence may
be grounds for a new trial, but an aggrieved party is not entitled to
similar relief for evidence that has come into existence after the trial is
over since such a procedure could result in perpetual trials. Newly
discovered evidence that will entitle a party to a new trial on such
grounds must be material, such that it will probably produce a different
result on retrial, and it must appear that with reasonable diligence, such
evidence could not have been discovered and produced at trial.
NEW MATTER matters raised by defendant that go beyond mere denials
of plaintiff’s allegations. New matter consists of new issues, with new
facts to be proved, and purports to show that the alleged cause of action
never did exist and that material allegations are not true.
NEWSPERSON’S PRIVILEGE see journalist’s [newsperson’s]
privilege.
NEWSPERSON’S SHIELD see shield laws.
NEW TRIAL see trial [NEW TRIAL].
NEW YORK CURB EXCHANGE former name of the American Stock
Exchange and now known as NYSE. NYSE’s parent corporation is
Intercontinental Exchange.
NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE [NYSE] the oldest organized stock
exchange in the United States, which has been active, since its
organization, in establishing listing requirements for companies whose
stocks are traded on the Exchange and in encouraging accurate and
timely disclosure of listed company income statement and balance
sheet results.
NEXT FRIEND a competent person who, although not an appointed
guardian, acts in behalf of a party who is unable to look after his or her
own interests or manage his or her own lawsuit; one who represents an
infant, or other party, who by reason of some disability, is not sui juris.
A next friend is not considered a party to the suit, but is regarded as an
agent or officer of the court to protect the rights of the disabled person.
NEXT-IN, FIRST-OUT [NIFO] a method of inventory valuation. See
inventory [NEXT-IN, FIRST-OUT [NIFO]].
NEXT OF KIN the term is used generally with two meanings: (1) nearest
blood relations according to law of consanguinity, and (2) those
entitled to take under statutory distribution of intestates’ estates. In the
latter case, the term is not necessarily confined to relatives by blood, but
may include a relationship existing by reason of marriage, and may well
embrace persons who, in the natural sense of the word, bear no relation
of kinship at all.
NEXUS clear, direct connection; core; link.
NGRI not guilty by reason of insanity. See not guilty [NOT GUILTY BY
REASON OF INSANITY].
NIHIL (nĭ’-hĭl) Lat.: nothing; not at all, in no respect; NIL is an often-used
form of the noun. Most commonly used to describe a sheriff’s return
after an unsuccessful attempt to serve a summons or otherwise gain
jurisdiction over an individual.
NIL see nihil.
NINTH AMENDMENT one of the Bill of Rights stating that the rights
enumerated in the Constitution shall not be construed to deny or
disparage other rights retained by the people. These rights are those so
basic and fundamental and so deeply rooted in our society to be truly
essential rights, and that nevertheless, cannot find direct support
elsewhere in the Constitution. The Amendment was included in an
abundance of caution and together with the reserved powers amendment
(Tenth Amendment) was intended to emphasize the limited powers
conferred upon the new central government. The Ninth Amendment has
been cited by the United States Supreme Court very few times but was
relied upon by some members of the Court to identify a right of marital
privacy to bar a state from prohibiting the use of contraceptives by
married persons.
NISI (ne@’-se@) Lat.: unless. Used in law after decree, order, rule to indicate
that the adjudication shall take permanent effect at a specified time
unless cause is shown why it should not or unless it is changed by
further proceedings. More particularly, a decree nisi is a conditional
divorce, which becomes absolute upon the expiration of a stipulated
period unless cause to the contrary is shown within the time period. See
decree [DECREE NISI].
NISI PRIUS (ne@’-se@ pre@’-u*s) Lat.: unless the first. In American law,
sometimes used to describe any court where a case is first heard by a
judge and jury, distinguishing such courts from the appellate courts.
See original jurisdiction.
NLRA National Labor Relations Act. See labor organization [union]. See
National Labor Relations Board.
NLRB see National Labor Relations Board.
NO BILL see grand jury [NO BILL]; indictment [NO BILL].
NO FAULT a system of insurance whereby all persons who are injured in
an automobile accident may be compensated for any injuries resulting
therefrom, without regard to who was at fault.
EXAMPLE: At one o’clock in the morning, two automobile drivers get into
an accident. Each claims that the other ran a red light. Under a no-fault
insurance plan, the argument as to who ran the light is irrelevant. The
plan provides each driver with compensation for his injuries from his
own insurance company. If the injuries are substantial, fault may be
relevant, as suit is generally permitted based on fault, even in no-fault
jurisdictions, for injury that exceeds some specified dollar amount.
Under a no-fault system, most cases, however, can be settled without
litigation.
NO-FAULT DIVORCE see divorce [NO-FAULT DIVORCE].
NOLENS VOLENS (no@-le*nz vo@’-le*nz) Lat.: whether willing or unwilling.
NOLLE PROSEQUI (no@l’-e@pro@s’-e@-kwῑ) Lat.: unwilling to prosecute; the
prosecution’s abandonment of a charging document, count or part of a
count; a discontinued prosecution by the authorized attorney for the
state; the formal entry of a declaration that a case will not be further
prosecuted. If applicable statutes of limitation have not run, the
defendant can be re-indicted and prosecuted again. A nolle prosequi
cannot be pleaded as former jeopardy or res judicata. Sometimes
abbreviated as NOL. PROS. See dismissal.
NOLO CONTENDERE (no@’-lo@ ko*n-te*n’-de*-ra@) Lat.: I do not wish to
contend, fight or maintain (a defense). A statement that the defendant
will not contest a charge made by the government. Like a demurrer to
an indictment, it admits all facts stated in the indictment for the
purposes of a particular case, but it cannot be used as an admission
elsewhere, or in any other proceeding, such as a civil suit arising from
the same facts.
EXAMPLE: Zayan is charged with careless driving. He pleads “nolo
contendere” and is fined by the court. Since he did not admit guilt, his
plea cannot be used against him if he is sued by an injured party.
NOL PROS see nolle prosequi.
NOMINAL DAMAGES see damages [NOMINAL DAMAGES].
NOMINAL PARTY see party [NOMINAL PARTY].
NOMINEE one who has been asked to act for another in a particular
context, such as a trustee or an agent; one who has been nominated as a
candidate for office; one to whom a party to an agreement may assign
his or her rights under a contract.
EXAMPLE: Rohan agrees to buy a property from Blaze. Since Rohan may
want to put the title in the name of another person or entity, the
agreement will provide for title to be issued “to Rohan or his nominee.”
NOMOTHETIC founded upon or derived from law; lawgiving; legislative.
NONACCESS see access.
NONASSESSABLE STOCK stock purchased from the issuer at full par
value or more per share. Fully paid stock cannot be assessed to pay
debts of the issuer in the event of bankruptcy liquidation and is,
therefore, non-assessable. Almost all domestic stock issues are nonassessable and instances of assessments against shareholders are
extremely rare.
NON ASSUMPSIT (no*n aW-su*mp’-sĭt) Lat.: he did not promise; he did not
undertake. A form of pleading in which the defendant claims that he or
she did not undertake or promise any obligation in the manner or form
that is set forth in the plaintiff’s complaint. Compare assumpsit.
NONBINDING ARBITRATION see arbitration [NONBINDING
ARBITRATION].
NONCOMPETITION CLAUSE see covenant [COVENANT NOT TO
COMPETE].
NON COMPOS MENTIS (no*n ko*m’-po@s me*n’-tĭs) Lat.: not having
control over the mind or intellect; not of sound mind; insane. In certain
circumstances its effect is lessened to mean only not legally competent.
NONCONFORMING USE a use of land that lawfully existed before
enactment of a zoning ordinance and that may be maintained after the
effective date of the ordinance although it no longer complies with use
restrictions newly applicable to the area. Continuation of the existing
use includes preservation of both the functional use of the land and the
physical structures thereon, and neither of these aspects of use may be
extended once the zoning restriction has taken effect.
EXAMPLE: Prior to any zoning restrictions, Russ opens a doctor’s office
adjacent to his home. Subsequently, the town passes an ordinance
prohibiting any business in Russ’s section of town. Russ is permitted to
continue operating his office as a nonconforming use, but he cannot
expand his office without express permission from the zoning officials.
See grandfather clause. Compare variance.
NONCONNECTED PACS see political action committee
[NONCONNECTED PACS].
NONCONTESTABILITY [INCONTESTABILITY] CLAUSE a
provision in an insurance policy that precludes the insurer from
disputing the validity of the policy on the basis of fraud or mistake
after a specified period. If the insurer wishes to contest the policy on
any grounds that would justify rescission, it must do so within the
prescribed period, either by suing to cancel the policy or by asserting
fraud or misrepresentation as a defense in an action instituted by the
policyholder or beneficiary. The purpose of the clause is to require the
insurer to investigate with reasonable promptness the accuracy of
information provided by the policyholder. It prevents the insurer from
lulling the policyholder into a sense of security during the time when
facts could best be ascertained, only to litigate them belatedly.
NONCUSTODIAL SENTENCE see sentence [NONCUSTODIAL
SENTENCE].
NONDELEGABLE see delegable duty.
NONDISCRETIONARY TRUST [FIXED INVESTMENT TRUST] an
investment trust that may buy only those securities on a list set forth
when the trust is organized. The percentage of total assets that may be
invested in a specific security or type of securities is usually
predetermined. See unit investment trust.
NONFEASANCE in the law of agency, the total omission or failure of an
agent to perform a distinct duty that he or she has agreed with his or her
principal to do; also, the neglect or refusal, without sufficient excuse, to
do what is an officer’s legal duty to do. Nonfeasance differs from
misfeasance, which is the improper doing of an act that one might
lawfully do, and from malfeasance, which is the doing of an act that is
wholly wrongful and unlawful. See misconduct.
NONMEMBER BANK a bank that is not a member of the Federal
Reserve System and is regulated only by the banking laws in the state
in which it is chartered.
NONNEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS see negotiable instruments.
NON OBSTANTE VEREDICTO see n.o.v.
NONPERFORMANCE the failure to fulfill an obligation. The
nonperformance must be material and substantial to justify suspension
of another’s return performance. See performance. See also
consideration [FAILURE OF CONSIDERATION].
NONPROFIT [NOT-FOR-PROFIT] CORPORATION an incorporated
organization chartered for other than profit-making activities and
exempt from corporation income tax. Most such organizations are
engaged in charitable, educational, or other civic or humanitarian
activities, although nonprofit corporations are not restricted to such
activities. See charity.
NON PROSEQUITUR (nôn pro@-se*k’-wi-teWr) Lat.: he has not proceeded.
An entry by the defendant that the plaintiff has not continued his or her
action. Under modern rules, such failure on the part of the plaintiff
would result in either a dismissal of the action or in a default judgment
for the defendant. Abbreviated NON PROS.
NONREBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION see presumption
[NONREBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION].
NONRECOGNITION OF GAIN see recognition [NONRECOGNITION OF
GAIN].
NONRECOURSE without personal liability. An obligation that is
nonrecourse does not provide a basis for federal taxation purposes for
individuals or partnerships except in certain limited cases such as when
real estate is involved. If a promisor has limited his or her exposure in
the event of a default to a particular pledged asset such as equity in a
building or entity, his or her obligation will be regarded as nonrecourse.
Individuals often structure transactions in corporate form to achieve
similar limited personal liability.
NONRESIDENT ALIEN see alien [NONRESIDENT ALIEN].
NON SEQUITUR (no*n se*’-kwĭ-tu@r) Lat.: it does not follow; it does not
come after (in time); abbreviated non seq. A non sequitur action or
decree is unrelated to the preceding events. A non sequitur has no
logical, temporal, or spatial purpose for its place in the progression of
events.
NONSTOCK CORPORATION a corporation owned by its members
under the membership charter or agreement, rather than through the
issue of shares.
NONSUFFICIENT FUNDS CHECK see NSF [NONSUFFICIENT FUNDS]
CHECK.
NON SUI JURIS (no@n swe@ju@’-rĭs) Lat.: not by his own authority or legal
right. Refers to those who are not legally competent to manage their
own affairs as regards contracts and other causes in which this
incompetency restricts exercise of sound judgment. Compare non
compos mentis.
NONSUIT a judgment rendered against a plaintiff who fails to proceed to
trial or is unable to prove his or her case. Since the adjudication is made
when the plaintiff has failed to provide evidence sufficient to establish a
case, it does not decide the merits of his or her cause of action, and
thus does not preclude bringing it again. The term is sometimes broadly
applied to various terminations of an action that do not amount to a
judgment on the merits.
EXAMPLE: Rose sues a local appliance store for selling her a defective
washing machine. At the beginning of the trial, she cannot produce any
evidence to show that she bought the machine at that particular store.
The judge declares a nonsuit against Rose and dismisses her claim.
See dismissal. Compare acquit.
NONSUPPORT the failure to provide support that one can provide and
that one is legally obliged to provide to a spouse, child, or other
dependent. Although nonsupport of wife and child were apparently not
crimes at common law, statutes in all states contain provisions making
such acts crimes with respect to children and in nearly all states with
respect to spouses. Most jurisdictions treat the offense as a
misdemeanor. See desertion; support.
NON VULT (no*n vu*lt) Lat.: abbreviation of non vult contendere (“he will
not contest”). Refers to a plea by one charged with a crime that does not
expressly admit guilt, but acknowledges that the defendant will not
contest the charge and therefore agrees to be treated as though he or she
had been found guilty. See nolo contendere.
NO-PAR [NONPAR] STOCK stock issued with no value stated on the
stock certificate.
NORMAL COURSE OF BUSINESS see ordinary course of business.
NOSCITUR A SOCIIS (no@’-si-teWr a@so@’-she@-ĭs) Lat.: it is known by its
associates. Under this rule of statutory construction, the meaning of a
word in a statute is ascertained in light of the meaning of words with
which it is associated. When two or more words in a statute are grouped
together, and ordinarily have a similar meaning but are not equally
comprehensive, the general word will be limited and qualified by the
specific word. Compare ejusdem generis.
NO STRIKE CLAUSE a clause in a labor agreement that prohibits
employees from striking for any reason during the life of the contract.
Such a clause regulates relations between the employer and the
employees. It is not an unfair labor practice under the National Labor
Relations Act for an employer to bargain in good faith for such a
clause.
NOTA BENE (no@’-taW ba@-na@) Lat.: note well. Written on the original note
N.B. to indicate an important portion of the text to be studied.
NOTARY PUBLIC a public officer authorized to administer oaths, to
attest to and certify certain types of documents, to take depositions, and
to perform certain acts in commercial matters. The seal of a notary
public authenticates a document. In some jurisdictions an attorney
admitted to practice within the jurisdiction can act as a notary public. In
many jurisdictions private persons can apply for and receive authority to
act as notaries to witness documents.
NOTE a written paper that acknowledges a debt and promises payment to
a specified party of a specific sum, and that describes a time of
maturity that is either definite or will become definite. See commercial
paper; treasury note.
NOT-FOR-PROFIT CORPORATION see corporation [NOT-FOR-PROFIT
CORPORATION]; nonprofit [not-for-profit] corporation.
NOT GUILTY a plea by the accused in a criminal action that denies every
essential element of the offense charged. A plea of not guilty on
arraignment obliges the government to prove the defendant’s guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt and preserves the right of the accused to
defend against the charge. A jury verdict of not guilty does not mean
the jury found the accused innocent, but simply that the state failed to
prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt.
NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY a special form of verdict or finding
that is usually followed by commitment of the defendant to a mental
institution. The insanity defense differs from other defenses in that, if
successful, it is not an acquittal and does not result in the outright
release of the accused.
NOTICE information concerning a fact actually communicated to a person
by an authorized person, or actually derived by him or her from a proper
source. Notice to a defendant of a lawsuit that has been instituted
against him or her or of an action in which he or she may have an
interest to defend is accomplished by service of process on him or her.
ACTUAL NOTICE direct positive knowledge of fact in question or
information sufficient to put a prudent person on inquiry as to such fact.
“Actual notice” embraces those things of which one has express
information and which reasonably diligent inquiry would have
disclosed.
AVERMENT OF NOTICE a statement in the pleadings declaring that a
party to an action has received proper notice thereof.
CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE notice presumed by law to have been acquired;
often accomplished by posting of notices or by mailing of notification to
the defendant if he or she cannot be personally served with process.
EXAMPLE: Neil sues Quincy for a debt incurred when Neil painted his
house. One requirement of filing the suit is that Neil personally notify
Quincy of the court action. After several unsuccessful attempts to meet
Quincy and physically hand him a copy of the complaint, Neil satisfies
the notice requirement by sending a copy to Quincy’s business and
home addresses and by tacking a copy on Quincy’s door. Quincy is
considered to have received constructive notice of the action whether or
not he actually learned of it.
IMPLIED NOTICE notice that may be inferred from facts that a reasonable
person had means of knowing but failed to inquire further. A person has
no right to avoid information and then say that he or she had no notice.
“Implied notice” is distinguished from CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE (above),
in that the latter rests upon strictly legal presumptions whereas the
former is a form of ACTUAL NOTICE (above) arising from inferences of
fact.
EXAMPLE: Ronit plans to buy an apartment complex from Maru. Upon
touring the property, Ronit observes that all the apartments are
occupied. Upon purchasing the property, he is shocked to find out that
the tenants have long-term leases. His failure to follow up on the
information that the units were occupied will prevent any claim that he
had no notice that existing tenants came with the property.
INDIRECT NOTICE see IMPLIED NOTICE (above).
INQUIRY NOTICE with respect to one who claims to have been a bona
fide purchaser without notice of adverse claims to the purchased
property, information from whatever source derived that would create in
an ordinary mind apprehension about the actual state of ownership of
the property and that would prompt a person of average prudence to
make inquiry.
JUDICIAL NOTICE see judicial notice.
LEGAL NOTICE such notice as the law requires to be given. Legal notice
may be notice that the law implies because of knowledge of the actual
facts (see ACTUAL NOTICE, above), because of specific avoidance of the
available knowledge (see IMPLIED NOTICE, above), or because of the
presumption that knowledge has been acquired (see CONSTRUCTIVE
NOTICE). Refers also to the act of advertising by publication in a legal
or general circulation newspaper. Publication includes such notices as
the proposal formation or settlement of a class action suit, or a person’s
legal change of name.
NOTICE BY PUBLICATION method of bringing a lawsuit to the attention of
parties who may have an interest therein by publishing notification of it
in a newspaper of general circulation; permissible only where
specifically allowed by statute and generally limited to actions
involving land, estates or status.
PERSONAL NOTICE communication of notice orally or in writing,
according to the circumstances, directly to the person affected or to be
charged.
RACE NOTICE see recording acts.
NOTICE OF APPEAL see appeal [NOTICE OF APPEAL].
NOTICE OF APPEARANCE see appearance.
NOTICE OF DISHONOR notice, given in any reasonable manner, that an
instrument has been dishonored. Notice of dishonor may be given to
any person who may be liable on the instrument by or on behalf of the
holder or any party who has himself or herself received notice, or any
other party who can be compelled to pay the instrument. In addition, an
agent or bank in whose hands the instrument is dishonored may give
notice to a principal or customer or to another agent or bank from which
the instrument was received. Delay without excuse in giving notice of
dishonor completely discharges an indorser.
NOTICE OF LIS PENDENS see lis pendens.
NOTICE OF MOTION see motion.
NOTICE TO QUIT formal notification terminating a tenancy on a
specified date. A notice to quit part of the property is valid only if
specifically allowed by the tenancy. The notice may be given by either
the landlord or the tenant to the other party.
NOTORIOUS POSSESSION possession of real property that is open,
undisguised, generally known or recognized. The term is one of the
elements in defining or determining existence of adverse possession,
which involves a claim of right to property not by title but by
possession for a prescribed period. See also hostile possession.
N.O.V. [NON OBSTANTE VEREDICTO] (no*n o*b-sta*n’-ta@ve*r-e*-dĭk’-to@)
Lat.: notwithstanding the verdict. A JUDGMENT N.O.V. is one by the trial
court that reverses the determination of the jury, granted when it is
obvious that the jury verdict had no reasonable support in fact or was
contrary to law. The motion for a judgment n.o.v. provides a second
chance for the trial court to render what is, in effect, a directed verdict
for the moving party.
NOVATION substitution of another party for one of the original parties to
a contract, with the consent of the remaining party. The old contract is
then extinguished, and a new contract, with the same content but with at
least one different party, is created. A novation often involves a
transaction whereby the original debtor is discharged from liability to
his creditor by substitution of a second debtor.
NOW ACCOUNT [NEGOTIABLE ORDER OF WITHDRAWAL
ACCOUNT] an interest-bearing savings account against which
depositors are permitted to write checks. See bank.
NSF [NONSUFFICIENT FUNDS] CHECK nonsufficient funds check. If
the drawee (bank) discovers that the drawer lacks funds to cover the
presented check, the drawee can dishonor the check, and the presenter
is powerless to make the drawee pay. See bad check.
NUDUM PACTUM (nu@’-du*m päk’-tu*m) Lat.: a bare contract. A promise
naked of obligation on one side; not enforceable, since contracts must
generally be supported by a consideration on each side. See mutuality
of obligation.
NUGATORY void; invalid; for example, judicial proceedings in courts
that lack jurisdiction. Compare voidable.
NUISANCE 1. anything that disturbs the free use of one’s property, or that
renders its ordinary use uncomfortable; 2. in tort law, a wrong arising
from unreasonable or unlawful use of property to the annoyance or
damage of another or of the public.
EXAMPLE: Zari rents an apartment in a residential apartment building. In
the adjacent apartment, a politically active group meets very frequently
at late hours to discuss strategy and to type press releases. The
apartment is at no time used for sleep. Even if the group’s activities are
legal, Zari has a nuisance action against the group. Their late hours
disturb her, and the apartment is not used for its normal and intended
purpose.
ABATABLE NUISANCE a nuisance that can be suppressed, extinguished or
rendered harmless, and whose continued existence is not authorized
under law.
ABATEMENT OF A NUISANCE the removal or termination of a nuisance by
self-help.
ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE see attractive nuisance.
COMMON NUISANCE see PUBLIC [COMMON] NUISANCE (below).
MIXED NUISANCE a nuisance which is both a public nuisance and a
private nuisance at the same time; it interferes with a right of the general
public and also interferes with a particular person’s use and enjoyment
of his or her land.
PRIVATE NUISANCE an actionable interference with a person’s interest in
the private use and enjoyment of his or her land.
PUBLIC [COMMON] NUISANCE an unreasonable interference with a right
common to the general public; behavior that unreasonably interferes
with the health, safety, peace, comfort or convenience of the
community.
NUISANCE PER SE an act, occupation, or structure that is a nuisance at
all times and under any circumstances, regardless of its location or
surroundings; acts that are denounced as illegal by law, when
perpetration of them invades rights of others. From an evidentiary point
of view once a nuisance per se is established by proof, it becomes a
nuisance as a matter of law.
NULL AND VOID see nullity.
NULLIFICATION cancellation, revocation. See also annul. Often refers
to the power of a jury to negate a conviction by refusing to follow the
judge’s instructions (which would have resulted in a guilty finding if
literally applied but would have perpetrated an injustice under the
particular circumstances). Nullification occurs when, contrary to the
evidence, the jury acquits, often in cases involving political causes, civil
disobedience, racism, or overzealous or selective prosecution. William
Penn benefitted from jury nullification in 1670 when he was acquitted
in his unlawful assembly trial for organizing Quaker meetings.
NULLITY in law, a void act or an act having no legal force or validity;
invalid; null. It is the highest degree of an irregularity, and is such a
defect as renders the proceeding in which it occurs of no avail or effect
whatever and incapable of being made so. A proceeding that is
essentially defective, or that is expressly declared to be a nullity by
statute.
NUL TIEL RECORD see trial [TRIAL BY THE RECORD].
NUNC PRO TUNC (nu*nk pro@tu*nk) Lat.: now for then.
NUNC PRO TUNC ORDER an order used by the courts to correct the
record usually after a proceeding has been concluded. It supplements a
prior judgment or order in any matter over which the court originally
had jurisdiction.
NUNCUPATIVE WILL oral declarations of a person made with
dispositive intent during a last illness, where a written will would not be
possible. Such oral wills are rarely upheld because of the opportunity
for fraud and because of the detailed requirements for their validity.
Such requirements are that the testator, during sickness, indicate that the
disposition is to be a will, that it be reduced to writing by a witness
within a short time, that more than one witness prove the will, and that
the witnesses are disinterested and competent. The requirements are
strictly adhered to, except for persons in actual military service. See
military will. Nuncupative wills are generally restricted to personalty
under the statute of frauds and thus cannot operate to transfer real
property.
NYSE see New York Stock Exchange [NYSE].
O
OATH a declaration of the truth of a statement. See affidavit; affirmation.
See also perjury.
OATH EX OFFICIO at common law, an oath administered by an
ecclesiastical court whereby a member of the clergy accused of a crime
would have to swear to his or her innocence. An accused was also
obliged to put forward proof of his or her innocence, after which the
ecclesiastical judge, not a jury, decided innocence or guilt.
The phrase has also referred to a process whereby the court, upon an
accusation, could order the accused into court to swear an oath. After
the courts abused their right by turning their proceedings into
inquisitions, the English Parliament abolished the oath.
OBAMACARE see affordable care act.
OBITER DICTA (o@’-bĭ-teWr dĭk’-taW) Lat.: passing or incidental statements.
Statements made or decisions reached in a court opinion that were not
necessary to disposition of the case; plural of obiter dictum. See
dictum.
OBJECT a procedure whereby a party asserts that a particular witness, line
of questioning, piece of evidence or other matter is improper and should
not be continued, and asks the court to rule on its impropriety or
illegality.
EXAMPLE: Elizabeth is on trial for writing a bad check. The prosecution
asks a witness whether Elizabeth ever owned a gun without a proper
permit. Elizabeth’s attorney will object and seek to exclude the question
and answer on the grounds that the question will introduce improperly
“other crimes” (i.e., possession of a gun) into the case.
OBJECTION a procedure whereby a party asserts that a particular witness,
line of questioning, piece of evidence, or other matter is improper and
should not be continued, and asks the court to rule on its impropriety or
illegality. A timely objection on the record, stating the grounds thereof,
must be made to evidence rulings admitting or excluding evidence if the
ruling is to be challenged later on appeal. This is necessary to preserve
the point on appeal. As to other rulings or orders entered by a trial court,
the failure to object will not prejudice a party’s right to challenge on
appeal the action taken if he or she had no opportunity to object. See
also challenge; motion [MOTION IN LIMINE].
OBLIGATION, MUTUALITY OF see mutuality of obligation.
OBLIGATION OF A CONTRACT the term refers not to any duty that
rises out of the contract itself, but to the legal requirements that bind the
contracting parties to the performance of their undertaking.
IMPAIR THE OBLIGATION OF A CONTRACT to weaken the contract in any
respect. Any law that changes the intention and legal effect of the
original parties, giving to one a greater and to the other a lesser interest
in the contract, that hastens or postpones the prescribed time of
performance, or imposes conditions not included in the contract, or
dispenses with the performance of those that are included, impairs the
obligation of a contract. Impairment also exists where the right to
enforce a contract is eliminated or substantially lessened. State statutes
that impair contract obligations are prohibited by Article 1, Section 10
of the United States Constitution.
OBLIGEE one who is entitled to receive a sum of money or to have an act
or deed performed as promised or agreed to by the obligor.
OBLIGOR one who has promised or is otherwise obligated to perform an
act or deed, such as the payment of a sum of money under a promissory
note or other contract. Compare obligee.
OBLOQUY blame, censure, reproach; to expose one to obloquy is to
subject one to blame or disgrace and may constitute defamation.
OBSCENE MATERIAL material that, taken as a whole, appeals to the
prurient interest of the average person, depicts sexual conduct in a
patently offensive manner, and lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value. Matter so classified is not protected by the free speech
guarantee of the First Amendment. See pornography.
OBSCENITY see obscene material.
OBSOLESCENCE the process by which property becomes useless, not
because of physical deterioration, but because of scientific or
technological advances.
OBSTRUCTION OF JUSTICE the impeding of those who seek justice in
a court, or of those who have duties or powers of administering justice
therein; includes attempting to influence, intimidate or impede any
juror, witness or officer in any court regarding the discharge of his
duty.
EXAMPLE: Geneva possesses telephone recordings of a contractor
offering a bribe to secure a construction grant. When Mack, another
contractor, sues to have the grant overturned because of the possibility
of a bribe, he requests that Geneva give him the recordings. If Geneva
destroys or otherwise loses the recordings after they are requested, she
will be charged with obstruction of justice.
Statutes addressing this subject may reach beyond interference with
the judicial process and also proscribe interference with police officers
and other such administrative officials. See embracery; misprision of
felony.
OBVIOUS RISK a risk that is readily apparent. At common law, a master
was not liable to servants for any obvious risks of the employment,
rather, the servant was held to have assumed the risk of the
employment.
OCCUPANCY the act of occupying or taking possession; to hold or use.
See certificate of occupancy.
OCCUPANT one who has the actual use or possession of property. See
tenant. Compare landlord; title.
OCCUPATIONAL DISEASE [INJURY] a disease that is the natural
result of a particular employment, where that employment involves a
risk of contracting the disease greater than the risk in employment and
living conditions in general, and that usually develops gradually from
the effects of long-continued work at the employment.
OCCUPATIONAL HAZARD a risk distinctively associated with a
particular type of employment or workplace.
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ACT [OSHA] a law
passed by Congress in 1970 for the purpose of preventing employees
from being injured or contracting illnesses in the course of their
employment. Under OSHA, the Secretary of Labor is empowered to
promulgate national safety and health standards, and to enforce such
standards by seeking the imposition of civil and criminal injunctions
and penalties. Broad congressional authority granted to OSHA to make
warrantless inspections of business premises has been held to be
unconstitutional. Thus, an OSHA inspection may be made only in
accordance with the administrative inspections permitted in other
contexts. See search and seizure.
OCCUPYING THE FIELD see preemption.
OCCURRENCE TEST see transactions [occurrence] test.
ODD LOT in the securities trade, stocks or bonds in a block of fewer than
100 shares. In buying or selling an odd lot, a premium or discount to
the round lot price is charged; this charge is referred to as the ODD LOT
DIFFERENTIAL.
ODIOUS base, vile, scandalous, detestable, disgraceful.
ODIUM hatred, dislike.
OF COUNSEL refers to an attorney who aids in the preparation of a case,
but who is not the principal attorney of record for the case. He or she
usually assists the attorney who has been hired for the case. See on the
brief.
OFFENSE any violation of law for which a penalty is prescribed, including
both felonies and misdemeanors. See degree of crime.
OFFER 1. a manifestation of willingness to enter into a bargain, so made
as to justify another person in understanding that his or her assent to that
bargain is invited and will establish a contract.
EXAMPLE: A representative of Clay Brick Company sends a letter to a
large outlet store informing them of an overstock in several types of
bricks the company is hoping to eliminate. The store responds that it
will buy the full overstock for the price stated in Clay’s letter, and
includes a check with their response. The store views Clay’s letter as an
offer. By sending a positive response and a check to Clay, the store
believes that a bargain has been struck and a valid contract established.
2. a promise, a commitment to do or refrain from doing some
specified thing in the future. 3. In the securities trade, an offer indicates
price and volume available from open market sellers of stocks and
bonds. 4. an underwriting in which a broker offers a large quantity of
a specific issue at a fixed price, called an offering.
OFFER OF PROOF to offer evidence for acceptance at trial. Such an
offer of evidence is governed by the appropriate jurisdiction’s rules of
evidence. For example, if a party offers evidence through the
testimony of a witness, certain of the questions asked by counsel may
be objected to. Should the court inquire as to the propriety of the
questioning, counsel would then ordinarily offer to the court, or proffer,
the relevance of the question. In such an instance the offer of proof
would not ordinarily be made within the hearing of the jury if one is
present. If the court sustains the objection, the appellate court will
assume that the proffer could have been established for the purposes of
reviewing the trial court’s ruling.
EXAMPLE: In an armed robbery trial Simon testifies for the prosecution
that he was in the Nightclub Lounge and saw Charlotte rob the
bartender at gunpoint. The defense cross-examines Simon and asks if he
has a girlfriend named Dunya. The prosecutor objects that the question
is not relevant to the subject at hand, which is a robbery trial and not an
inquiry into Simon’s dating habits. The defense proffers that Dunya will
be called as a witness to state that she was with Simon at the Nightclub
Lounge and they were playing pool but they never were close enough to
the bar to see any robbery take place.
OFFICER l. a person invested with the authority of a particular position or
office; may be public or private in that the occupied office may or may
not be invested with a public trust. 2. corporate personnel appointed by
the directors and charged with the duty of managing the day-to-day
affairs of the corporation. See de facto [DE FACTO OFFICER].
OFFICIAL IMMUNITY see immunity.
OFFICIOUS INTERMEDDLER one who performs an act that confers a
benefit upon another, although he or she had neither a contractual duty
nor a legally recognized interest in performing the act, and who
nevertheless seeks restitution for the benefit conferred.
OFFSET see setoff.
OF RECORD refers to the recordings of documents such as deeds or
mortgages with the appropriate entity as well as to the testimony
recorded as the official transcript of a case. The ATTORNEY OF RECORD
is the official designate of a party upon whom service of papers may be
made.
OF THE ESSENCE see time is of the essence. Compare on or about.
OLIGOPOLY 1. an industry in which a few large sellers of substantially
identical products, such as automobiles, dominate the market; 2. the
condition of a specific products market so dominated. An oligopolistic
industry is more concentrated than a competitive one but less
concentrated than a monopoly.
OLOGRAPHIC see holographic will.
OMISSION a failure to do something; something left undone; the neglect
to perform what the law requires. Omission will not give rise to liability
unless there is a duty to act.
EXAMPLE: A motorist sees an accident on the highway late at night but
fails to call anyone, although he possessed a working cell phone. As a
result of that omission, one of the victims of the accident dies. Although
common standards may view the motorist as somewhat responsible for
the death, the motorist cannot be found liable in a court of law since he
has no legal duty to report the accident. If he had been involved in the
accident, he would have had a legal duty to summon help and his
omission in that instance would be the subject of civil and possibly
criminal action.
Compare actus reus.
OMNIBUS all inclusive; broad. See in omnibus.
OMNIBUS CLAUSE a clause in an automobile liability insurance policy
that gives categories of persons, in addition to the person named as
assured (see insured), the benefit of the policy, within specified
limitations. The clause extends protection to one permitted to use the
car, although the assured may not be liable for an accident under the
doctrine respondeat superior. The object is to cover the liability of the
operator of the car as unnamed assured, and to protect any injured
person by giving him or her a cause of action against the insurer for
injuries deemed by law to have been caused by the operation of the car.
Statutes have been passed in some jurisdictions requiring the inclusion
of omnibus clauses for the protection of automobile accident victims.
ON ALL FOURS describes a case similar to or identical with the case at
hand and therefore possibly useful as precedent; derived from the Latin
maxim, “Nullum simile est idem nisi quattuor pedibus currit”: Nothing
similar is identical unless it runs on all four feet.
ON DEMAND when asked for. For example, a note payable on demand is
payable when the sum is requested; called a demand note if no due date
is included.
ONE MAN [PERSON], ONE VOTE see reapportionment [ONE PERSON,
ONE VOTE PRINCIPLE].
ON ITS FACE see void for vagueness [FACIAL INVALIDITY].
ON OR ABOUT language used in legal documents to qualify a time or a
place as approximate. Unless the parties expressly provide, any
reference to time of performance is presumed to be approximate so that
the failure to perform as specified is not a breach. Where the parties
intend otherwise, they generally provide in the legal document that
“time is of the essence” or words to that effect.
ON THE BRIEF designation on a brief indicating the names of persons
who contributed to the written product. Such persons may or may not be
listed as the attorneys of record. Many reported cases list the attorneys
of record and all persons “on the brief.” See of counsel.
ON THE MERITS refers to a judgment based upon the essential facts of
the case rather than upon a technical rule of practice, such as failure of
proper service or other jurisdictional defect. A decision on the merits
is rendered after a full presentation of the evidence and determines
finally the rights of the parties, barring appeal or subsequent
relitigation.
EXAMPLE: After several weeks of preparation, the attorneys for both sides
presented their arguments to the judge. By carefully considering all the
evidence and relevant legal theory, the judge was able to base his
decision on the merits. Had the judge dismissed the case because one of
the attorneys failed to comply on time with a rule of court, the case
would have been dismissed because of a procedural flaw and not on the
merits.
ON THE PLEADINGS see judgment [SUMMARY JUDGMENT].
OPEN visible, free from concealment, exposed to public view;
unobstructed, such as land without trees or fences. See notorious
possession; plain view.
An account or matter that is not final and not closed.
An attorney opens a trial by addressing the trier of fact and briefly
summarizing the facts and theory of the case that he or she intends to
develop during the trial. This is known as an OPENING STATEMENT.
OPEN ACCOUNT account that has not yet been settled or paid; a series of
transactions that give rise to credits and debits, but that results in a
single liability.
OPEN AND NOTORIOUS see notorious possession.
OPEN COURT a court that is formally opened and engaged in the
transaction of judicial affairs, to which all persons who conduct
themselves in an orderly manner are admitted. Most legal proceedings
take place in open court except where confidentiality is a recognized
interest (e.g., matrimonial, adoption or juvenile delinquency
proceedings).
OPEN END FUNDS see investment company [trust].
OPENING STATEMENT see statement [OPENING STATEMENT].
OPEN POSSESSION see notorious possession.
OPEN PUBLIC MEETINGS LAWS see sunshine laws.
OPEN SHOP an enterprise that employs workers without regard to
whether they are members of a labor union.
OPERATING LOSS see net operating loss.
OPERATING STATEMENT see income statement.
OPERATION OF LAW the determination of rights and obligations
through the automatic effects of the law and not by any private
agreement or direct act of the party affected.
EXAMPLE: Chris and Pat own a home as tenants by the entirety. Under
that principle of property, when either dies, the survivor has sole
ownership of the home. Since this event occurs automatically, it is said
to occur by operation of law.
OPINION the reason given for a court’s judgment, finding or conclusion,
as opposed to the decision, which is the judgment itself. When the court
is composed of more than one judge or justice, and more than one
opinion has been written in a given case, the opinion that expresses the
view of the majority of the judges presiding, and thus announces the
decision of the court, is referred to as the MAJORITY OPINION.
CONCURRING OPINION a view basically in accord with the majority
opinion, but written to express a somewhat different perception of the
issues, to illuminate a particular judge’s reasoning or to expound a
principle that he or she holds in high esteem. An opinion that concurs
“in the result only” is one that rejects the reasoning and conclusions
concerning the law or the facts on the basis of which the majority
reached its decision, and that expresses a different view that has
coincidentally led the judge or justice to recommend the same
disposition as was agreed upon by the majority.
DISSENTING OPINION a view that disagrees with the disposition made of
the case by the court, with the facts or law on the basis of which the
court arrived at its decision, or the principles of law announced by the
court in deciding the case. Opinions may also be written that express a
dissent “in part.”
EXPERT OPINION see expert witness.
LAY OPINION see lay witness.
MAJORITY OPINION one that is joined by a majority of the court.
Generally known as “the opinion.”
PER CURIAM OPINION an opinion “by the court,” which expresses its
decision in the case without identifying the author.
PLURALITY OPINION one agreed to by less than a majority of the court
but the result of which is agreed to by the majority. A plurality opinion
carries less weight under stare decisis than does a MAJORITY OPINION
(above).
Opinion also refers to the conclusions reached by a witness that are
drawn from his or her observations of the facts. See expert witness.
OPT-IN [OPT-OUT] see permission-based marketing [OPT-IN][OPT-OUT].
OPTION a contract that gives the holder a right or option to buy or sell
specified property, such as stock or real estate, at a fixed price for a
limited period. See option contract; stock option.
OPTIONAL WRIT see peremptory writ.
OPTION CONTRACT a binding promise in which the owner of property
agrees that another shall have the privilege of buying the property at a
fixed price within a stated period of time. It is the offeror’s acceptance
of consideration in exchange for his or her promise to keep the offer
open for a designated period of time that renders the offer irrevocable.
See firm offer.
An option must be supported by consideration, often the payment of a
small sum of money that may be, though need not be, applied as a down
payment if the option is exercised. It exists only when the option holder
alone has the right to determine whether he or she shall require the
performance called for by the option. If the agreement states that the
option may be exercised only with the consent of the other party, it is
not an option even though so-called by the agreement. Some types of
option contracts are formed without consideration such as an offer that
the offeror should reasonably expect to induce action or forbearance of
a substantial character on the part of the offeree before acceptance and
that does not induce such action or forbearance. Such action or
forbearance is binding as an option contract to the extent necessary to
avoid injustice. Under the Uniform Commerical Code a seller can offer
a buyer an option contract without consideration by making an
irrevocable offer and complying with other statutory requirements. See
stock option.
ORAL spoken.
ORAL ARGUMENT legal arguments given in court proceedings by
attorneys in order to persuade the court to decide a legal issue in favor
of their client.
ORAL CONFESSION an acknowledgment by a criminal defendant that he
or she did the act of which he or she is accused and is guilty of a crime
as a result of it. See self-incrimination, privilege against.
ORAL CONTRACT see contract [ORAL CONTRACT].
ORAL DEPOSITION see deposition [ORAL DEPOSITION.]
ORAL TRUST a trust created by the agreement of the grantor and the
settlor, but for which no document is executed setting forth the terms of
the trust. Trusts of land are subject to the Statute of Frauds. Most
states will recognize an oral trust of personal property; however, a few
states also subject trusts of personal property to the Statute of Frauds.
ORAL WILL see nuncupative will.
ORDER 1. a direction of the court on a matter incident to the main
proceeding that adjudicates a preliminary point or directs some step in
the proceeding. If an order closes the matter and precludes future
hearing and investigation, it is a FINAL ORDER; but an order that does
not completely dispose of the subject matter of the controversy and
settle the rights of the parties is not final. A final order is an appealable
order. See interlocutory.
2. In the securities trade, an instruction to buy or sell a specified
security under specified conditions. The most common type of order is a
MARKET ORDER which is specified as to volume with price determined
by the market level at the time of sale. Instructions can include a limit as
to price to be paid or received (LIMIT ORDER) and a limit as to the time
the bid or offer is available. If the order is for the day only, it is a DAY
ORDER; if it is GOOD UNTIL CANCELED, it is a standing order called a
GTC.
ORDER PAPER see order paper.
ORDER BILL OF LADING see bill of lading [ORDER BILL OF LADING].
ORDERED LIBERTY a concept in constitutional law that the due
process requirements applicable to the states through the Fourteenth
Amendment to the United States Constitution do not incorporate all the
provisions of the first ten amendments (the Bill of Rights), but only
those measures essential for the preservation of a scheme of ordered
liberty.
This restrictive view of due process has been largely rcplaced by a
broader view of incorporating nearly all of the Bill of Rights as
representing a national standard of fundamental fairness.
ORDER PAPER in commercial law, a negotiable instrument that by its
terms is payable to a specified person or his or her assignee, rather than,
for instance, to cash or to bearer. The payee must be named or
otherwise indicated with reasonable certainty. Compare bearer paper;
indorsement.
ORDER TO SHOW CAUSE see show cause order.
ORDINANCE a local law that applies to persons and things subject to the
local jurisdiction. Usually it is an act of a city council or similar body
that has the same force as a statute when it is duly enacted. See home
rule; preemption.
ORDINARY COURSE OF BUSINESS the common practices of
commercial transactions; refers to a necessary activity that is normal
and incidental to the business.
ORDINARY INCOME for tax purposes, income subject to being taxed at
the highest rates, as opposed to capital gains, which may be taxed at
lower rates. Generally, only capital losses may be deducted against
capital gains, and only ordinary income may be offset by the other
deductions. See income [ORDINARY INCOME].
ORDINARY NEGLIGENCE see negligence [ORDINARY NEGLIGENCE].
ORDINARY PRUDENT PERSON see reasonable man [person].
ORGANIC LAW the fundamental law of a country, state, or society; the
law upon which its legal system is based, whether that law is written,
such as a constitution, or unwritten.
ORGANIZATION EXPENSE see expense [ORGANIZATION EXPENSE].
ORGANIZED CRIME a syndicate of professional criminals who rely on
unlawful activities as a way of life. Often called the FAMILY, the MAFIA,
or the MOB. See racketeering.
ORGAN TRAFFICKING see trafficking [HUMAN TRAFFICKING].
ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RULE see best evidence rule.
ORIGINAL INTENT see intent [ORIGINAL INTENT].
ORIGINAL ISSUE the initial sale or issue of a security.
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION authority to consider and decide cases in
the first instance, as distinguished from APPELLATE JURISDICTION (see
jurisdiction), which is the authority to review a decision or judgment
of an inferior tribunal.
EXAMPLE: The Constitution of the United States provides that the
Supreme Court has original jurisdiction in all cases affecting
ambassadors. Notwithstanding any issue of diplomatic immunity, if an
ambassador from France were sued, the Supreme Court, rather than
some lower court, would hear the case.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE DOCTRINE the constitutional prohibition of
state and local taxation of goods while they are still in their original
packages. The U.S. Constitution prohibits states from imposing import
or export duties. In an early case, the Supreme Court held that an item
in its original package retained its character as an import and was thus
free of tax by a state while in the original form or package in which it
was imported.
OSHA see Occupational Safety and Health Act [OSHA].
OSTENSIBLE AUTHORITY see apparent authority.
OTC see over-the-counter market [OTC].
OUI operating under the influence. See driving while intoxicated [DWI].
OUSTER the wrongful dispossession or exclusion of a person, usually
associated with the acts of a co-owner that exclude other co-owners
from their legal right to share possession.
OUTLYING POSSESSIONS see state [OUTLYING POSSESSIONS].
OUT-OF-COURT SETTLEMENT in civil cases, the resolution of a
dispute between parties prior to the rendering of a final judgment by the
trial court. Compare plea bargaining.
OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES those costs for necessary items paid
directly (usually by cash) and subject to recovery at a later time. An
example would be a tenant’s purchase of a tarp to cover a hole in the
roof until the landlord is able to make repairs. Said purchase might be
deducted from rent or directly reimbursed by the landlord. An attorney
often advances expenses for clients and obtains reimbursement from the
client or from the final settlement.
OUT-OF-POCKET (RULE) method of measuring damages in breach of
contract or warranty cases or cases involving fraud or
misrepresentation. Calculated as the difference between the actual
value of what was received and the purchase price. Compare benefit of
the bargain (rule).
OUTPUT CONTRACT see contract [OUTPUT CONTRACT].
OUTSIDE THE RECORD see record [OUTSIDE THE RECORD].
OUTSTANDING ISSUE see authorized issue [OUTSTANDING ISSUE].
OVERBREADTH the overbroad aspect of a statute forbidding or
inhibiting conduct that is constitutionally protected. Compare chill
[CHILLING EFFECT]; void for vagueness.
OVERREACHING in commercial law, the taking of unfair advantage
through cunning, cheating, fraud or abuse of superior bargaining power.
Contracts that are the product of overreaching may be unenforceable
under modern concepts of fraud or the unconscionability doctrine.
OVERRULE 1. to overturn or make void the holding (decision) of a prior
case; generally accomplished in a different and subsequent case, when a
court renders a decision that is substantially opposite the decision made
in the prior case. A decision can be overruled only by the same court or
a higher court within the same jurisdiction. The overruling of a
decision generally destroys its value as precedent. Compare reversal.
2. to deny a motion, objection or other point raised to the court.
OVERT ACT open act; especially, an outward act done in furtherance of a
crime and as a manifestation of intent to accomplish the crime. See also
attempt; conspiracy; treason.
EXAMPLE: Maneet and Isabelle agree to rob a bank. In preparation,
Maneet steals a car and Isabelle buys a ski mask. Both the theft of the
car and the purchase of the ski mask as well as any other acts innocent
or criminal may be overt acts if they are done in furtherance of a
criminal conspiracy.
OVER-THE-COUNTER MARKET [OTC] a securities dealers market
that handles trading in securities that are not listed stocks on an
organized exchange. OTC trading differs from exchange trading in two
significant ways: (1) transactions are carried out through telephone
contact and negotiation with a number of dealers, called market makers,
as compared to the single specialist, single location auction market
mechanism used for listed securities trading, and (2) the market maker
acts as principal in the transaction that involves the dealer as buyer and
seller from his or her own inventory. The bulk of bond trading is carried
out in the OTC market.
OWI operating while intoxicated. See driving while intoxicated [DWI].
OWNER the person who has legal title to property; the person in whom
ownership, dominion, or title of property is vested. See also record
owner.
OWNERSHIP exclusive right of possessing, enjoying, and disposing of a
thing; often said to include the concept of possession and that of title,
thus to be broader than either.
ALLODIAL OWNERSHIP free ownership, not subject to the restrictions or
obligations associated with feudal tenures.
TENURIAL OWNERSHIP the holding of land subject to specific services or
obligations owed to another. See fee simple.
OYER hearing. At common law, the reading to a defendant upon his or her
demand the writ upon which the action is brought.
OYER AND TERMINER in English law, special tribunals empowered to
hear and determine cases within their criminal jurisdiction,
commissioned by the king when the delay involved in ordinary
prosecution could not be tolerated, as in the case of sudden insurrection.
The term has been sometimes used in American law to identify high
courts of criminal jurisdiction in some states.
OYEZ (often pronounced “O Yes”) hear ye. An exclamation used to get
attention for an official proclamation or proceeding. In many
courtrooms, the bailiff normally cries “oyez” to signal the beginning of
the court proceeding.
P
P.A. Professional Association. See professional corporation.
PAC see political action committee.
PACKAGE, ORIGINAL see original package doctrine.
PACTUM (päk’-tu*m) Lat.: pact, contract, agreement. See also nudum
pactum, a naked or bare agreement.
PAID-IN-SURPLUS in corporate finance, the amount paid for stock in
excess of its par value.
PAIN AND SUFFERING a species of damages that one may recover for
physical or mental pain that results from a wrong done. See also
survival statute.
PAINTING THE TAPE expression for a person or group making
transactions without a true change of ownership to give the impression
that a stock is trading actively. See manipulation [RIGGED ORDERS;
WASH SALE]; wash sale.
PAIS (pa@, pa@s) Fr.: the countryside.
PALIMONY an award of support like alimony but made to a partner in a
dissolved nonmarital relationship. Where the partners had an express
contract, founded on consideration other than sexual services, some
courts have held the contract enforceable; where no such formal
agreement exists, the court may determine whether the conduct of the
parties warrants a finding of implied contract or other understanding to
support an award.
PALLIATE to mitigate; make less severe or intense.
PANDER to pimp; to cater to the lust of another. A PANDERER is a pimp,
procurer, male bawd. PANDERING is 1. the crime of inducing a female to
become a prostitute; 2. the promotion of obscene literature or movies by
appeals to prurient interests. See aid and abet; solicitation.
PANDERER see pander; prostitution.
PANEL the list of persons who have been summoned for jury duty and
from whom a jury may be chosen. To IMPANEL a jury means to summon
and select a jury.
Panel also refers to the group of appellate judges who will hear an
appeal. Typically, intermediate appellate courts consist of several judges
who sit in panels of three.
PAPER see bearer paper; chattel paper; commercial paper; order
paper.
PAPER PROFIT unrealized gain; profit that exists and is reflected in
financial statements but that has not been reduced to cash and realized
for tax purposes. See realization.
PAR equal to the established value; denotes the face amount or stated value
of a negotiable instrument, stock or bond, and not the actual value it
would receive on the open market. Bills of exchange, stocks and the like
are AT PAR when they sell for their stated value.
PAR VALUE is the stated or face value of a stock or bond. It has little
significance for common stock; current practice is to issue no-par stock
or stock with an arbitrary low value to avoid taxes. In the case of
preferred stock, par takes on added importance since it specifies the
dollar value upon which dividends are paid, and preferreds are usually
offered for sale or exchange at par value. The par value on bonds
specifies both the maturity payment and interest base.
PARALEGAL one not a member of the bar who is employed, usually by a
law office, to perform a variety of tasks associated with a law practice,
any of which may be performed properly and conveniently by one not
trained or authorized to practice law.
PARALLELISM see conscious parallelism.
PARAMOUNT TITLE a title that will prevail over another asserted
against it; signifies immediate right of possession, and is generally
referred to as the basis for eviction of a tenant by one with a right of
possession superior to that of the tenant.
PARAMOUR one’s lover; one in the place of a husband or wife, but
ordinarily without the legal rights attached to the marital relationship.
See palimony.
PARCENER in common law, one who, jointly with others, as coparcener,
holds an estate by virtue of descent (i.e., inheritance). The holding of a
parcener is generally known as an estate in coparcenary and usually
refers to the estate held by each inheritor before the inheritance has been
divided (i.e., partitioned). The term is no longer widely used, since it is
now said to be indistinguishable from a TENANCY IN COMMON (see
tenancy).
PARDON an exercise of the sovereign prerogative to relieve a person from
further punishment and from legal disabilities resulting from a crime of
which he or she has been convicted. Its effect is that of relaxing the
punishment and blotting out guilt, so that in the eyes of the law the
offender is as innocent as if he or she had never committed the offense.
See amnesty; commutation; executive clemency; parole.
EXAMPLE: Sofia is convicted of destroying government property in a
protest march. As a result of that conviction, Sofia can no longer keep
her job as a state employee. A few years later, serious questions are
raised as to some of the witnesses’ truthfulness, especially in light of the
excellent reputation Sofia enjoyed before her conviction. After being
presented with the issues, the governor grants Sofia a pardon. That
pardon enables Sofia to work once more for the state.
CONDITIONAL PARDON any pardon imposing some condition, precedent
or subsequent, that is not illegal, immoral, or impossible of
performance.
UNCONDITIONAL PARDON goes no further than to restore the accused to
his civil rights and remit the penalty imposed for the particular offense
of which he was convicted in so far it remains unpaid.
PARENS PATRIAE (pa*’-ren*z pa*’-tre@-ῑ) Lat.: parent of his country. The
role of the state as sovereign and guardian of persons under legal
disability. By exercising this authority the state emphasizes that a child
is not the absolute property of a parent but is a trust reposed in a parent
by the state as parens patriae.
PARENTAL LIABILITY responsibility of parents for tortious acts
committed by their minor children. While at common law, parents did
not have such liabilities, the fact that juvenile misbehavior resulted in
uncompensated victims led many states to enact statutes imposing
liability on parents for the tort of their minor child. These statutes vary
widely, but usually limit the parents’ liability to a small dollar amount.
PARENT CORPORATION see subsidiary.
PARI DELICTO see in pari delicto.
PARI MATERIA see in pari materia.
PARITY equality.
PARLIAMENT a legislative body. The term was first used to describe the
legislative body of England, Scotland, and Ireland and still is used to
describe that of the United Kingdom. Many countries and localities that
are former British colonies call their legislative bodies “Parliament.”
PARLIAMENTARY LAW general body of rules governing the orderly
procedure of any legislative or other deliberative body. The most
commonly followed rules are “Robert’s Rules of Order.”
PAROLE in criminal law, a conditional release from imprisonment that
entitles the person receiving it to serve the remainder of his or her term
outside prison if he or she complies with all the conditions connected
with his or her release. Compare pardon; probation.
PAROL EVIDENCE oral rather than written evidence. See parol
evidence rule [merger clause].
PAROL EVIDENCE RULE [MERGER CLAUSE] a rule that declares
that when terms of a contract have been embodied in a writing (called
the integration of the agreement) to which both parties have assented,
parol (oral) evidence of contemporaneous or prior oral agreements is
not admissible for the purpose of varying or contradicting the written
contract.
EXAMPLE: Mateo signs a contract with a home improvement builder to
construct a pool at certain specifications. When the project is
completed, Mateo claims that the builder orally agreed to change the
specifications at Mateo’s request. Because the specifications were never
changed, Mateo refuses to pay, and the builder sues him. Unless the
circumstances allow Mateo to introduce as parol [oral] evidence the
builder’s statement agreeing to the changes, the builder will probably
prevail on the basis of his written contract with Mateo.
PARTIAL ACTUAL EVICTION see eviction [PARTIAL ACTUAL
EVICTION].
PARTIAL BREACH a breach that gives rise to a claim for damages but
that is so slight that it does not substantially impair the value of the
contract to the injured party and thus does not give the injured party
cause to abandon the whole contract. See breach [PARTIAL BREACH].
PARTIALLY DISCLOSED PRINCIPAL see principal.
PARTICULARS, BILL OF see bill of particulars.
PARTITION a judicial separation of the respective interests in land of joint
owners or TENANTS IN COMMON (see tenancy), so that each may take
possession of, enjoy and control his or her separate estate. Partition is
thus the dissolution of the unity of possession existing between
common owners, with the result that the parties hold their estates in
severalty. Partition is available whenever desired by any co-tenant in a
tenancy in common.
A JOINT TENANCY (see tenancy) can be destroyed by either the sale
or the mortgaging of a joint owner’s interest in the estate, and the
resultant tenancy in common is then subject to partition, thus defeating
the survivorship rights of other joint tenants in the sold or mortgaged
property.
EXAMPLE: Marwan and his friend own a large piece of undeveloped land
as tenants in common. Marwan uses his ownership interest to obtain a
loan from the bank. When he defaults on the loan, the bank can seek a
partition of the land. With a partition, the bank owns one-half of the
land and Marwan’s friend owns one-half. Subsequent to a partition, the
parties own particular portions of the land. If the land cannot be divided
equitably, the land would be sold and the proceeds divided.
PARTNERSHIP 1. a contract of two or more persons to place their
money, effects, labor and skill, or some or all of them, in lawful
business, and to divide the profit and bear the loss in certain
proportions; 2. an association of two or more persons to carry on as coowners a business for profit. Partners are individually liable for the
debts of the partnership, and assets individually owned will be subject
to execution to satisfy any such debt when partnership assets are
insufficient. A partnership is not subject to tax; rather the income is
divided and taxed as personal income to the individual partners, unlike
profits in corporations. The decision whether to form a partnership or to
incorporate is generally controlled by the tax consequences.
ARTICLES OF PARTNERSHIP the written agreement, setting forth each
partner’s rights in and obligations to the partnership.
LIMITED PARTNERSHIP an entity in which one or more persons, with
unlimited liability (called GENERAL PARTNERS), manage the partnership,
while one or more other persons contribute only capital. This latter
group of partners (called LIMITED PARTNERS) have no right to participate
in the management and operation of the business and assume no liability
beyond the capital contributed. Compare corporation; joint venture.
See distribution [PARTNERSHIP DISTRIBUTION].
PART PERFORMANCE see statute of frauds.
PARTY 1. in a judicial proceeding, a litigant (plaintiff or defendant); a
person directly interested in the subject matter of a case; one who would
assert a claim, make a defense, control proceedings, examine witnesses
or appeal from the judgment. 2. a person or entity that enters into a
contract, lease, deed, etc.
AGGRIEVED PARTY see aggrieved party.
INDISPENSABLE PARTY one whose involvement in the subject matter of a
controversy is such that his or her interests will be affected, or one
whose joinder in the action is required to enable a complete
adjudication of the issues as well as the fashioning of an effective
remedy. A suit cannot in equity and good conscience proceed without
one who is regarded as an indispensable party.
EXAMPLE: Ball Corporation is the largest maker of a chemically based
ceiling tile, although other smaller companies also produce the product.
The tiles were installed in school buildings, and the chemical in them
has had an adverse effect on the children. It could not be determined
which company’s tiles had been used, but only the smaller companies
are named in a suit by the children. Ball is never mentioned. The other
companies want Ball named as an indispensable party because, by
numbers alone, it is most likely that Ball’s tiles were used in schools.
Ball also wants to be named because it fears that a judgment against the
other companies will be used against it, even though it did not have an
opportunity to participate in the litigation, and because otherwise a
favorable outcome for the other companies would not prevent Ball from
being sued later for the same thing.
NECESSARY PARTY one whose interests will be affected by the suit or
without whom complete relief cannot be granted, but who will not be
joined if doing so would deprive the court of jurisdiction in the case.
NOMINAL PARTY party appearing on the record not because he or she
has any real interest in the case, but because technical rules of pleading
require his or her presence in the record.
PARTY WALL see party wall.
POLITICAL PARTY a group of people united in pursuit of common
political goals, specifically including the election of their members to
public office.
PREVAILING PARTY see prevailing party.
PROPER PARTY one who has an interest in the subject matter of the
litigation, but without whom a substantial decree may nevertheless
issue, though such decree will not settle all questions in the controversy
with respect to such party.
REAL PARTY IN INTEREST see real party in interest.
SECONDARY PARTY see secondary party.
THIRD PARTY someone other than the parties directly involved in the
action or transaction; an outsider with no legal interest in the matter.
PARTY TO BE CHARGED see statute of frauds.
PARTY WALL a dividing wall between adjoining landowners that exists
for the common benefit of both properties that it separates, and of which
any use may be made by either party, so long as such use is not
detrimental to the other. The two landowners own the wall as TENANTS
IN COMMON, (see tenancy), where the wall stands upon ground that is
itself held in common, or where it stands partly upon each of the two
adjoining properties. A party wall may be constructed wholly upon
property belonging to one of the parties, or it may be owned entirely by
only one of them; in either case the wall is subject to an easement to
have it maintained. A party wall is often one that provides support for
one or more separately owned structures.
PAR VALUE see par [PAR VALUE].
PASSIVE inactive, usually used to describe permissive behavior, such as
toleration of or failure to correct a dangerous condition on one’s
property as opposed to an affirmative act threatening the safety of
another. In tax law, PASSIVE INCOME, such as dividends, is a separate
category from active income. See income.
PASSIVE EUTHANASIA see euthanasia [PASSIVE EUTHANASIA].
PASSIVE INCOME see income [PASSIVE INCOME].
PASSIVE USE see use [PASSIVE USE].
PATENT evident; obvious.
PATENT OF INVENTION (often called simply a patent) a grant of right to
exclude others from the making or selling of an invention during a
specified time. It gives to its owner a legitimate monopoly. See patent
infringement.
PATENT OF LAND an instrument by which the government conveys a fee
simple interest in land to another.
PATENT PENDING (often abbreviated PAT. PEND.) a notice that the product
on which it is inscribed has been the subject of an application for patent
protection and that if a patent does issue, those with notice will be
subject to the applicant’s prior rights.
PATENT APPEALS see federal courts [COURT OF CUSTOMS AND PATENT
APPEALS].
PATENT DEFECT a defect that could be recognized upon reasonably
careful inspection or through ordinary diligence.
EXAMPLE: Alex examines a warehouse space prior to renting it for
himself. Normal examination would reveal that water leaked into the
warehouse in several spots. Some of Alex’s property in the warehouse is
subsequently damaged by water. Since the leakage is a patent defect,
which he should have discovered, Alex cannot sue for the damage.
Compare latent defect.
PATENT INFRINGEMENT the act of trespassing upon the rights secured
by a patent. The test of infringement is whether the device in question
does substantially the same work in substantially the same way and
accomplishes the same result as the device that has been patented.
Copyrights and trademarks can also be the subject of an
infringement action.
PATERNITY SUIT [BASTARDY PROCEEDINGS] a suit initiated to
determine the paternity of a child born out of wedlock and to provide
for the support of that child once paternity is proved. See DNA testing.
PATIENT PROTECTION AND AFFORDABLE CARE ACT [PPACA]
see affordable care act.
PAT. PEND. see patent [PATENT PENDING].
PATRICIDE the killing of one’s own father.
PATRIOT ACT Act of Congress to combat terrorism signed into law after
the events of 9-11 involving the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
The act is called the “Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing
Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of
2001” or USA Patriot Act. A four-year “Sunsets Extension Act” was
signed in 2011, extending the provisions of the act involving roving
wiretaps, searches of business records, and surveillance of individuals
suspected of terrorist-related activities. The act focused upon
combatting chemical-weapons offenses, the use of weapons of mass
destruction, the killing of Americans abroad, and terrorism financing.
To fight the threats, the act provided for many things, including
strengthening border security and establishing an electronic crime task
force and funding for it. It expanded search powers for law
enforcement, including interception of telephone, e-mail, and bank
records, often without the need for judicially sanctioned wiretap
warrants. It allows notification of search warrants to be delayed,
meaning that the individual would not be notified of the search until
after it was carried out. It also provides for indefinite detention of
persons suspected of terrorism. The act also added crimes considered to
be acts of terrorism to include mass transit system attacks, use of a
biological weapon, supporting terrorism, and computer hacking. The
penalties for terrorist crimes also increased. The balance between
national security and personal civil liberty concerns has led to numerous
challenges to the act’s provisions, with some provisions being found to
be unconstitutional and other provisions expiring without renewal by
Congress.
PATRONAGE giving either protection or support. POLITICAL PATRONAGE
is the use of political office to protect one’s friends and supporters
through the influence of the office, and to support them by hiring them
for government jobs. The CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSIONS were established
to create professional bodies of government employees who would be
free of political patronage.
PAUPER indigent; one who is unable to provide his or her own support
and is otherwise without financial resources. Under the Equal
Protection Clause to the United States Constitution, indigents and
paupers may be excused from paying certain court costs and other legal
fees so that they may have equal access to the courts. See in forma
pauperis; indigent.
PAWN to deposit personal property with another as security for the
payment of a debt.
PAYABLES see account [ACCOUNT PAYABLE]; balance sheet; liabilities.
PAYABLE TO BEARER see bearer paper.
PAYABLE TO ORDER see order paper.
PAYEE any person to whom a debt should be paid; one to whose order a
bill of exchange, note or check is made payable.
PAYER [PAYOR] one who pays a debt or is obligated to pay a debt under
a promissory note or other instrument.
PAYMENT satisfaction of a claim or debt. Delivery of money in
fulfillment of an obligation.
PAYMENT DATE see ex dividend [PAYMENT DATE].
PAYMENT IN DUE COURSE payment of a negotiable instrument at or
after its date of maturity, made to its holder in good faith and without
notice of any defect in his or her title.
EXAMPLE: Uri fraudulently obtains a negotiable promissory note made
out by Raoul and payable to a third party. When the note becomes due,
Uri presents it to Raoul and Raoul pays it in due course. The third party
cannot force Raoul also to pay him, because Raoul had no knowledge of
the earlier fraud and, therefore, had no reason to suspect that the third
party did not legitimately negotiate the note to Uri.
PAYMENT INTO COURT the payment by a party of a sum of money or
other subject matter of a lawsuit into court for the duration of the
lawsuit. The court disposes of the money or other property as the parties
agree in their settlement of the lawsuit, or in accordance with the court’s
judgment.
PAYOR see payer [payor].
PAY TO PLAY term used to describe the practice of government (whether
federal, state, or local) contractors making campaign contributions or
giving things of value to those responsible for issuing the contracts.
Many states are enacting legislation to ban such practices by limiting
the amount and timing of certain gifts or campaign contributions.
P.C. see probable cause; professional corporation; protective custody.
Also an abbreviation for personal computer; politically correct.
PCR see DNA testing [PCR].
PCR ACTIONS see postconviction relief proceedings [PCR actions].
P.D. public defender. Also, police department.
PEACEABLE POSSESSION possession that is not interrupted by adverse
suits or other hostile action intended to oust the possessor from the
land. The existence of adverse claims is not precluded, so long as no
actual attempt to dispossess is made. See quiet title.
PEACEFUL ENJOYMENT see quiet enjoyment.
PECULATION the fraudulent misappropriation to one’s own use of
money or goods entrusted to one’s care. See embezzlement; larceny.
PECUNIARY consisting of money or that which can be valued in money.
A PECUNIARY LOSS is a loss of money or one that can be translated into
economic loss.
PENAL ACTION a civil suit brought for the recovery of a statutory
penalty imposed as a punishment for an offense againse the public.
PENAL INSTITUTION any place of confinement for convicted
criminals. Penal institutions include local and county jails and
workhouses, reformatories, penitentiaries, prison camps and farms, as
well as the modern CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION (new nomenclature
used to describe many penal institutions previously called “prisons”).
See jail.
PENAL LAW [CODE] a law to preserve public order that defines an
offense against the public and inflicts a penalty for its violation.
Statutes that grant a private (civil) action against a wrongdoer are not
considered penal, but remedial, in nature.
PENALTIES see civil penalties.
PENALTY sanction, usually an amount of money, imposed as punishment
for civil or criminal wrongdoing. The term also refers to a sum fixed by
contract to be payable by one party to the other for the failure of either
to perform his or her obligations under the contract. See civil penalties;
liquidated damages.
PENALTY CLAUSE a contract clause that provides for the payment of
an amount as forfeiture in the event a party defaults. Penalty clauses are
generally not enforced by the courts when the amount of the penalty is
unrelated to the damages incurred. However, the courts will sometimes
enforce a penalty on the grounds that the parties were free to agree to it.
Courts will enforce a liquidated damage clause when the amount of
actual damages is difficult to ascertain and the liquidated damages are a
reasonable attempt to approximate the actual damages.
PENDENTE LITE [LITE PENDENTE] (pe*n’-de*n’-ta@ le@’-ta@) Lat.:
suspended by the lawsuit; pending the lawsuit. Contingent upon the
determination of a pending lawsuit. See lis pendens.
EXAMPLE: Tenants in an apartment building sue their landlord for not
providing heat. The tenants do not want to pay full rent since they are
not getting heat, but state law requires full rent each month or else the
landlord can evict. To protect themselves, the tenants commence a
lawsuit and set up a bank account pendente lite where they deposit their
rent each month while the suit is in court. At the end of the suit, the
money in the account is applied to past-due rents less whatever amount
the court says the tenants are entitled to for lack of heat.
A spouse will seek alimony and child support payments pendente lite
in most cases after he or she sues for divorce.
See lis pendens.
PENDENT JURISDICTION federal court doctrine whereby a plaintiff,
notwithstanding the limitations of federal question jurisdiction, may
rely upon both federal and nonfederal grounds for the relief sought in a
complaint. Thus, where the plaintiff joins a federal claim with a state
law claim based on closely related or identical conduct of the defendant,
the federal courts have jurisdiction to hear and determine the state law
claims as well as those arising under federal law. See abstention;
jurisdiction [PENDENT JURISDICTION]. Compare ancillary jurisdiction.
PENITENTIARY see jail [PENITENTIARIES]; penal institution.
PEN REGISTER see WIRETAP [PEN REGISTER].
PENSION FUND see retirement plan [PENSION FUND (PLAN)].
PENSION PLAN see retirement plan [PENSION FUND (PLAN)].
PENSION PROTECTION ACT pension legislation passed in 2006
providing a number of significant tax incentives to enhance and protect
retirement savings and strengthen workers’ retirement security. Its
provisions include inherited IRAs; DB(k)s; and increased contribution
amounts to retirement accounts. See retirement plan.
PEONAGE see Thirteenth Amendment [PEONAGE].
PER ANNUM (pe*r a*n’-nu*m) Lat.: by the year; annually.
PER [PUR] AUTRE VIE (pe*r [pu@r] ô’-tr ve@) Fr.: for or during the life of
another. A life estate measured by the life of a third person rather than
the life of the grantee.
PER CAPITA (pe@r ka*p’-ĭ-taW) Lat.: by the heads. Anything figured per
capita is calculated by the number of individuals, (heads) involved and
is divided equally among all.
PER CURIAM (pe*r ku@’-re@-äm) Lat.: by the court. See opinion [PER
CURIAM OPINION].
PER DIEM (pe*r de@’-e*m) Lat.: by the day. l. pay for a day’s services. 2.
Government and private business travel allowances are often allocated
on a per diem basis.
PEREMPTORY absolute, final, not admitting of question or appeal. A
peremptory trial date may be established by the court on its own motion
or at the request of a party to insure timely disposition of the case. In
selection of a jury each side has a right to a fixed number of
PEREMPTORY CHALLENGES to the seating of potential jurors, which
means that counsel may reject a certain number of potential jurors for
any reason, or for no reason. See challenge [PEREMPTORY CHALLENGE];
peremptory writ.
PEREMPTORY CHALLENGE see challenge [PEREMPTORY
CHALLENGE].
PEREMPTORY PLEA see plea [PEREMPTORY PLEA].
PEREMPTORY WRIT a peremptory writ is a form of mandamus that
requires the act commanded be done absolutely. In comparison, a usual
writ of mandamus permits the public official the choice of either doing
the act commanded or showing legal cause why it need not be done.
Before a peremptory writ can issue, the official must be given notice of
the legal action and an opportunity to defend.
In common law, peremptory writs were a species of original writs by
which lawsuits were begun. The peremptory original writ commanded
the sheriff to cause the defendant to appear in court and to defend the
suit. It was used when general damages to be assessed by the jury were
requested. A suit was otherwise begun by the use of an optional writ,
which commanded the defendant to do the acts requested or to show
cause why they should not be done. This writ was used when the
plaintiff requested a specific remedy, such as the return of a parcel of
land or the payment of a specific sum. Compare prerogative writ.
PERFECTED completed, executed, enforceable, merchantable; refers
especially to the status ascribed to security interests after certain events
have occurred or certain prescribed steps have been taken, such as filing
evidence of the interest, taking possession of the collateral, etc. A
perfected security interest has priority over an unperfected interest. The
date of perfection is also the time from which courts judge priority
contests among other holding perfected interest.
In practice, after the accomplishment of all steps necessary to entitle
a litigant to proceed in an appellate court, the appeal is said to be
perfected.
PERFORMANCE the fulfillment of an obligation or a promise; especially,
completion of one’s duty under a contract. See specific performance;
substantial perfomance. See also nonperformance. Compare
obligation of a contract.
PERFORMANCE BOND a bond that guarantees against breach of
contract; generally used in building contracts to guarantee that a
contractor will perform the contract. In the event the contractor defaults
or otherwise breaches the contract, the owner of the building project
may use the proceeds of the bond to complete the project. Depending
upon its terms, the proceeds of a performance bond may also be used to
pay subcontractors who furnish labor and materials See bond
[PERFORMANCE BOND].
PERIL risk, such as the risk that is insured in an insurance policy.
PER INFORTUNIUM (peWr ĭn-fôr-tu@’-ne@-u*m) Lat.: by accident.
PERIODIC TENANCY see tenancy [PERIODIC TENANCY].
PERJURY criminal offense of making false statements under oath. In
common law, only a willful and corrupt sworn statement made without
sincere belief in its truth, and made in a judicial proceeding regarding a
material matter, was perjury. Today, statutes have broadened the
offense so that in some jurisdictions any false swearing in a legal
instrument or legal setting is perjury. See also subornation of perjury.
EXAMPLE: Sheila is charged with robbery. At her trial, Tomas, Sheila’s
boyfriend, admits to the crime, which results in a “not guilty” verdict
for Sheila. Because of a procedural technicality, Tomas cannot be tried
for the robbery. But if the prosecution can prove that Tomas lied about
committing the crime, he could then be prosecuted for perjury.
PERMANENT FIXTURE see fixture.
PERMANENT INJUNCTION see injunction [PERMANENT [FINAL]
INJUNCTION].
PERMANENT RESIDENT see legal permanent resident [LPR].
PERMISSION-BASED MARKETING e-mail messages, mail, or
newsletters sent to a person who has given the sender permission.
Compare junk mail and spam.
OPT-IN granting permission for receipt of such communications by
registering or affirmatively responding to a request.
OPT-OUT request by a recipient to cease delivery or to unsubscribe from
such communications.
PERMISSION OF COURT see leave of court.
PERMISSIVE COUNTERCLAIM see counterclaim [PERMISSIVE
COUNTERCLAIM]; joinder [PERMISSIVE JOINDER].
PERMISSIVE JOINDER see joinder [PERMISSIVE JOINDER].
PERMISSIVE USE see use [PERMISSIVE USE].
PERMISSIVE WASTE see waste [PERMISSIVE WASTE].
PER MY ET PER TOUT (pe*r me@a@pe*r tu@) Law Fr.: by half and by whole.
In joint tenancy, each tenant’s share is the whole, for purposes of
tenure and survivorship [tout], and each share is an aliquot portion for
purposes of alienation [my]. Compare per tout et non per my.
PERPETUITIES, RULE AGAINST see rule against perpetuities.
PERPETUITY see in perpetuity.
PER QUOD (pe*r kwo*d) Lat.: through which; by which; whereby.
Requiring extrinsic circumstances (context); acquiring meaning only by
reference to external facts.
PER SE (pe*r sa@) Lat.: through itself, by means of itself. Not requiring
extraneous evidence or support to establish its existence. In defamation,
statements that damage a person’s reputation, without reference to the
circumstances that give the language their injurious meaning, are
libelous or slanderous per se. Language imputing any of the following
characteristics to a person is slanderous per se: having a loathsome
disease; having committed a crime; unchastity in a woman; and
incompetence in one’s profession.
ACTIONABLE PER SE act which on its face constitutes a cause of action.
No proof of damages is required. Applies in defamation cases, although
free speech constitutional considerations may prevail.
In antitrust law, some types of business conduct are considered per se
restraints of trade. Because proof of such conduct proves a violation of
the Sherman Antitrust Act, there is no need to prove any injury to
competition, which is otherwise a necessary element in an antitrust
claim. One example of a per se violation is price fixing.
PERSON in law, an individual or incorporated group having certain legal
rights and responsibilities. See natural person.
PERSON AGGRIEVED see aggrieved party.
PERSONAL ATTACK RULE see fairness doctrine [PERSONAL ATTACK
RULE].
PERSONAL CHATTEL see chattel [PERSONAL CHATTEL].
PERSONAL EFFECTS a vague phrase used to describe tangible property
having an intimate relation to the decedent, such as clothing and
jewelry.
PERSONAL EXPENSE see expense [PERSONAL EXPENSE].
PERSONAL EXPENSES DEDUCTIONS see deductions [PERSONAL
EXPENSES DEDUCTIONS].
PERSONAL HOLDING COMPANY a corporation having a limited
number of shareholders and a high percentage of passive income, such
as interest, dividends, rents, royalties, and capital gains. A special
income tax was imposed on personal holding companies in 1937 in
order to prevent taxpayers from avoiding taxes by placing their assets in
corporations. Previously, taxpayers would avoid income taxes by
placing their assets in one or more corporations, thereby splitting their
income among several taxpayers and taking advantage of the lower
marginal tax brackets. The PERSONAL HOLDING COMPANY TAX is
imposed on the undistributed income of such corporations at a flat rate.
The purpose of the tax is to force the shareholders to distribute the
corporation’s income to themselves as dividends so they may be taxed
on it at their regular rate of income tax.
PERSONAL JUDGMENT judgment imposed on defendant requiring
sums to be advanced from whatever assets he or she has within the
jurisdiction of the issuing court, as opposed to a judgment directed
against particular property (called an in rem judgment) or a judgment
against a corporate entity. See jurisdiction [IN PERSONAM
JURISDICTION].
PERSONAL JURISDICTION see judgment [PERSONAL JUDGMENT];
jurisdiction [IN PERSONAM JURISDICTION].
PERSONAL NOTICE see notice [PERSONAL NOTICE].
PERSONAL PROPERTY [PERSONALTY] things movable, as
distinguished from real property or things attached to the realty. See
chattel; fixture.
EXAMPLE: An agreement between a buyer and seller of a house provides
that the sale covers only the land and home and not the seller’s personal
property. This agreement means that the seller can remove items such as
furniture and rugs, but not the heating system.
PERSONAL RECOGNIZANCE see release on own recognizance
[ROR].
PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE a person who manages the affairs of
another, either under a power of attorney or due to the incapacity of the
principal either through death, incompetency, or infancy; for example,
the executor appointed under the will of a decedent or the committee
of an incompetent.
PERSONAL SERVICE see service [PERSONAL SERVICE].
PERSONALTY see personal property [PERSONALTY].
PERSONAM see in personam.
PER STIRPES (pe*r stûr’-pa@z) Lat.: through or by roots; by family stock
representation. The essential characteristic of a distribution of an
intestate’s estate per stirpes is that each beneficiary receives a share in
the property, representing the accurate fraction of the fraction to which
the person through whom he or she claims from the ancestor would
have been entitled. It is distinguished from a distribution per capita.
EXAMPLE: Keith dies without a will. His wife has predeceased him, and
he is survived by two children. A third child has also predeceased him
but has left two children. Under a per stirpes distribution, Keith’s two
children each receive one-third of his estate. The remaining one-third is
distributed to the children of the third child who had predeceased Keith.
PERSUASION BURDEN see burden of proof.
PER TOUT ET NON PER MY (pe*r tu@a@no@n pe*r me@) Law Fr.: by the
whole and not by the half. Describes the type of seisin that exists in a
JOINT TENANCY or TENANCY BY THE ENTIRETY (see tenancy). Thus, the
joint tenants or man and wife who own property by the entirety own an
undivided interest in the whole of the property but not an individual
interest in only a part of the property. See partition; tenancy [TENANCY
IN COMMON]. Compare per my et per tout.
PERVIOUS open to arguments; receptive to new ideas; approachable;
open-minded.
PETITION in equity procedure, the functional equivalent of a complaint
at law. It is a written application addressed to a court or judge, stating
facts and circumstances relied upon as a cause for judicial action, and
containing a prayer (formal request) for relief.
PETITIONER one who presents a petition to a court or other body either
to institute an equity proceeding or to take an appeal from a judgment.
The adverse party is called the respondent.
PETITION IN BANKRUPTCY the petition by which an insolvent debtor
declares bankruptcy and invokes the protection of the bankruptcy court
from creditors. Under the United States Constitution, Congress is given
power to establish uniform laws of bankruptcy. It has used this power to
preempt all state laws and state court actions by granting an automatic
stay of any proceedings against the bankrupt debtor upon the filing of a
bankruptcy petition. Creditors must seek their remedies against the
debtor in the bankruptcy court.
PETIT [PETTY] JURY see jury [PETIT [PETTY] JURY].
PETIT [PETTY] LARCENY see larceny [PETIT [PETTY] LARCENY].
PETTY JURY see jury [PETIT [PETTY] JURY].
PETTY LARCENY see larceny [PETIT [PETTY] LARCENY].
PHISHING see spam [PHISHING].
PHYSICAL WASTE see waste.
PHYSICIAN-PATIENT PRIVILEGE see privileged communication.
P.I. personal injury; private investigator.
PICKETING the practice, used in labor disputes, of patrolling, usually
with placards, to publicize a dispute or to secure support for a cause; a
constitutionally protected exercise of free expression when done
peaceably.
PIERCING THE CORPORATE VEIL the process of imposing liability
for corporate activity, in disregard of the corporate entity, on a person or
entity other than the offending corporation itself.
Generally, the corporate form isolates both individuals and PARENT
CORPORATIONS (see subsidiary [SUBSIDIARY CORPORATION]) from
liability for corporate misdeeds. However, there are times (such as when
incorporation itself was accomplished to perpetrate a fraud) when the
court will ignore the corporate entity and strip the organizers and
managers of the corporation of the limited liability that they usually
enjoy. In doing so, the court is said to pierce the corporate veil.
PILOT [PILT] abbreviations for “payment in lieu of taxes.” Federal
payments to local governments that help offset losses in property taxes
due to nontaxable federal lands within their boundaries. States also
apply the concept to universities and hospitals due to the public benefits
derived from them.
PIMP see pander; prostitution.
PINK SHEETS see listed stock [PINK SHEETS].
PINPOINT CITATION particular location of a quotation within an
opinion. In legal brief writing, the reader may then go directly to the
relevant area to find the quoted material. For example, “lawyers in
criminal courts are necessities, not luxuries” is cited as Gideon v.
Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335, 344 (1963). Page 335 directs the reader to
the first page of the Gideon opinion and page 344 directs the reader to
the specific page within the opinion where the quotation (or concept) is
found.
PIRACY at common law, the commission of acts of robbery and
depredation on the high seas that, if committed on land, would
constitute felonies. See hijacking. Piracy is also used to refer to the
commercial reproduction and distribution of property protected by
copyright, patent, trademark, or trade secret law. Pirated works, such as
videotapes or records, constitute copyright infringement. See also
plagiarism.
P.J. presiding judge.
PL. [P.L.] plaintiff; public law.
PLAGIARISM appropriation of the literary composition of another and
passing off as one’s own the product of the mind and language of
another. The offense of plagiarism, known in the law as INFRINGEMENT
OF COPYRIGHT, comes into being only when the work allegedly copied
is protected by copyright.
PLAIN ERROR (RULE) rule applicable to appellate courts that requires
the reversal of a conviction and the award of a new trial where an
obvious error in the trial proceedings affecting the fundamental right of
the accused to a fair trial was not objected to at the time it occurred and
went uncorrected by the trial court.
EXAMPLE: The prosecutor introduces very prejudicial evidence at Roy’s
trial. The judge fails to instruct the jury to limit their consideration of
that evidence, despite the obvious need for such an instruction. Roy is
convicted and the case is appealed. Even though Roy’s attorney did not
object to the introduction at the time it occurred—a procedure that
would normally be required before a new trial could be granted—the
appellate court may apply the plain error rule and grant Roy a new trial.
Compare harmless error; miscarriage of justice.
PLAIN LANGUAGE STATUTE[S] increasing tendency of state and
federal legislatures and courts to require clear, understandable language
in statutes, contracts, and opinions such that a person not familiar with
legal terms can readily understand the context.
EXAMPLE: Zoe provides a lease to her tenant Li Ming that clearly states
the rental terms, including what is covered by the security deposit, when
the rent is due, and when late penalties apply. Due to the simple but
clear language, Li Ming also understands that while he may have pets,
he can only have a maximum of two dogs and that each dog cannot
weigh more than 50 pounds. He also understands what would be
considered pet damage rather than normal wear and tear.
PLAIN MEANING (RULE) minority view that the words themselves
determine the meaning of a statute. See strict construction. The
majority view looks to the legislative history (committee hearings,
commentary) or other extrinsic evidence in determining the intent. See
four corners.
PLAINTIFF the one who initially brings the suit; one who, in a personal
action, seeks a remedy in a court of justice for an injury to, or a
withholding of, his or her rights.
PLAINTIFF IN ERROR one who appeals from a judgment against him or
her in a lower court, whether he or she was plaintiff or defendant in that
court.
THIRD PARTY PLAINTIFF refers to a defendant who files a complaint
against a third party not named as a defendant by the plaintiff, and so
not otherwise a party to the proceeding.
PLAIN VIEW a doctrine that may legitimize a search or seizure without a
search warrant, which otherwise is generally required.
EXAMPLE: While walking on the sidewalk, a policeman sees a marijuana
plant growing in someone’s house. Under the plain view doctrine, the
policeman can enter the house without a search warrant, even though a
house represents a highly protected privacy area that in almost every
other instance requires a search warrant prior to a policeman’s entrance.
PLAN see master plan.
PLAT in property law, a map that shows the location of real estate in a
town or county in relation to adjoining lots and landmarks such as
roads.
PLEA 1. in equity, a special answer relying upon one or more things as a
reason for the suit to be dismissed, delayed, or barred; 2. at law,
broadly, any one of the common law pleadings; 3. technically, the
defendant’s or respondent’s answer refuting the factual basis for the
plaintiff’s petition or complaint, as distinguished from a demurrer,
which is an answer asserting no cause of action exists as a matter of law.
4. In criminal procedure, the defendant will enter a plea at his or her
arraignment, of not guilty, guilty or, in some jurisdictions, nolo
contendere or non vult (meaning no contest). Pleas are either dilatory
or peremptory. The past tense is pleaded or pled.
AFFIRMATIVE PLEA one that sets up a single fact not appearing in the
bill, or sets up a number of circumstances all tending to establish a
single fact, which, if existing, destroys the complainant’s case.
ALFORD PLEA a guilty plea entered without a factual admission of guilt
by the defendant. There must be evidence indicating actual guilt. It is
done to accept the favorable aspects of a plea bargain rather than risk a
harsher sentence if convicted at trial. Not all jurisdictions permit Alford
pleas. See nolo contendere.
DILATORY PLEA one that tends to defeat the actions to which it refers by
contesting grounds other than the merits of plaintiff’s case. Hence, the
plea raises issues such as improper jurisdiction, wrong defendant, or
other procedural defects. See dilatory plea.
DOUBLE PLEA one which consists of several distinct and independent
matters alleged to the same point and requiring different answers.
INSANITY PLEA one by which the defendant claims innocence because of
a mental disorder or inability to reason that prevented him or her from
having a culpable mental state, i.e., from having the sense of
purposefulness (intent, willfulness, recklessness) that is a necessary
element of the crime charged. See insanity.
PEREMPTORY PLEA a type of PLEA IN BAR (below), which answers the
merits of the plaintiff’s complaint, as compared to a DILATORY PLEA
(above), which defends on grounds other than the merits.
PLEA IN ABATEMENT a DILATORY PLEA (see above) objecting to the place,
mode, or time of asserting the plaintiff’s claim, but not addressing any
of the underlying merits. These errors can be corrected, as opposed to
claims made in a PLEA IN BAR, at which time the claim can be renewed.
Compare PEREMPTORY PLEA (above).
PLEA IN BAR a plea that sets forth matters which per se destroy the
plaintiff’s right of action and bar its prosecution absolutely, such as a
bar due to a statute of limitations or a constitutional guarantee against
self-incrimination. This plea denies a plaintiff’s right to maintain the
action and which, if established, will destroy the action.
PURE PLEA see AFFIRMATIVE PLEA (above).
PLEA BARGAINING the process whereby the accused and the prosecutor
negotiate a mutually satisfactory disposition of the case. The defendant
may plead guilty to a lesser offense or to only one or some of the counts
in a multicount indictment. In return, the defendant seeks concessions
on the type and length of his or her sentence or a reduction of counts
against him or her.
EXAMPLE: Fred is charged with robbery while armed with a deadly
weapon. All witnesses say that Fred was seen with a gun. However, the
only gun found at the scene of the crime is on Fred’s partner. In Fred’s
state, robbery with a deadly weapon carries a much greater sentence
than robbery. Fred plea bargains with the prosecutor, offering to plead
guilty to robbery if the prosecutor will dismiss the charge relating to the
weapon and thus insure a shorter sentence. The State is spared the
expense and uncertainty attendant to a trial, and defendant minimizes
his overall exposure.
PLEAD 1. to make any pleading; 2. to answer plaintiff’s common law
declaration; 3. in criminal law, to answer to the charge, either
admitting or denying guilt.
PLEADED the past tense of plea. Synonymous with pled.
EXAMPLE: After Weber pleaded guilty to fraud, the judge revoked bail,
ordered the preparation of a presentence report, and set a sentencing
date.
PLEADING BURDEN see burden of proof.
PLEADINGS statements, in logical and legal form, of the facts that
constitute plaintiff’s cause of action and defendant’s ground of defense.
Pleadings are either allegations by the parties affirming or denying
certain matters of fact, or other statements in support or derogation of
certain principles of law, which are intended to describe to the court or
jury the real matter in dispute.
AFFIRMATIVE PLEADINGS any defensive pleadings that affirmatively
allege the existence of facts, rather than merely deny the existence of
the facts alleged by the plaintiff. For instance, if a plaintiff alleges the
nonpayment of a promissory note, the defendant may deny that the note
exists, or he may affirmatively plead that the note has been paid.
AMENDED PLEADINGS pleadings submitted to the court later in time than
the original pleadings and which correct the original pleadings or
arguments therein, such as by the addition of a cause of action or a
defense.
CODE PLEADINGS see code pleading.
DEFECTIVE PLEADING see defective pleading.
PLEADINGS IN THE ALTERNATIVE see alternative pleading.
RESPONSIVE PLEADINGS answers that either admit or deny the allegations
contained in the complaint, and thus respond to them, rather than raise
grounds upon which the complaint should be dismissed, such as the
expiration of the Statute of Limitations.
SUPPLEMENTAL PLEADINGS pleadings that assert a claim or a defense
based upon events occurring after the filing of the original pleading
which they supplement.
PLEADING THE FIFTH (AMENDMENT) see Fifth Amendment; selfincrimination, privilege against.
PLEA IN ABATEMENT see dilatory plea.
PLEASURE one who serves “at pleasure” can be fired without warning or
cause.
PLED see pleaded.
PLEDGE a deposit of personal property as security for a debt; delivery
of goods by a debtor to a creditor until the debt is repaid; generally
defined as a lien or a contract that calls for the transfer of personal
property only as security. See bailment; collateral.
PLEDGEE person who takes property to hold as security for a debt in
accordance with a contract.
PLEDGOR person who delivers the property.
PLENARY full or unqualified. In judicial proceedings, denotes a complete,
formally pleaded suit wherein a petition or complaint is filed by one
or more persons against one or more other persons who file an answer
or a response. A PLENARY ACTION is one in which a full trial or PLENARY
HEARING is had on the merits of a complaint following full discovery,
as distinguished from a summary proceeding. See de novo.
PLURALITY OPINION see opinion [PLURALITY OPINION].
PLUS TICK see up [plus] tick.
POCKET VETO a means by which the President of the United States may
effectively veto an act of Congress without exercising the presidential
veto right. Under the U.S. Constitution the President must veto
legislation within ten days after it has been passed by both the Senate
and the House of Representatives, or else the legislation will become
law. However, if Congress adjourns before the end of the ten-day period
the legislation will only become law if the President has signed it.
Accordingly, the President may effectively veto legislation that was
passed within the last ten days of the congressional session merely by
not signing it into law.
P.O.D. pay on death; pay on delivery.
POINT RESERVED at trial, the holding of a legal issue in abeyance for
argument, so that the testimony or other matters at hand may proceed.
POISONOUS TREE see fruit of the poisonous tree.
POLICE COURT an inferior municipal court with limited jurisdiction in
criminal cases. Minor cases can be disposed of by such courts, but
otherwise they generally have power only to arraign the accused and
set bail.
POLICE POWER inherent power of state governments, often delegated in
part to local governments, to impose upon private rights those
restrictions that are reasonably related to promotion and maintenance of
the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public. Restrictions
upon the use of one’s property, such as zoning laws, or upon the
conduct of one’s business, such as environmental regulations, are
imposed by state and local governments pursuant to the police power.
EXAMPLE: A federal law sets out certain requirements for processing
milk. One state has conclusively found that, because of conditions
peculiar to the state, the requirements are insufficient to protect its
citizens’ health. Under the state’s police power, the state legislature may
enact greater precautions that all milk must meet to be sold in that state.
POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEES special-interest groups formed
to provide money for a candidate’s election campaign or a legislative
initiative, or to counter against the same. The money is generally spent
on commercials and other advertising. The names of donors are publicly
reported but in some instances the filing of donor names is not required
to occur (if, for example, quarterly) until after an election has taken
place. The amount of money CONNECTED, NON-CONNECTED or
LEADERSHIP PACs may spend is regulated by federal or state election
laws. SUPER-PACS do not have a limit on donations.
CONNECTED PACS businesses, organized labor, or health organizations
raising money from a “restricted class,” generally consisting of
managers, shareholders, or members.
LEADERSHIP PACS groups formed by politicians to help fellow
candidates.
NON-CONNECTED PACS also known as IDEOLOGICAL PACs. They are
committees focusing on a single issue. These organizations may accept
funds from any individual, group, or connected PAC.
SUPER-PACS INDEPENDENT-EXPENDITURE ONLY COMMITTEES that may
raise funds from individuals, businesses, organized labor, and other
groups without any legal limit on donation size and can spend the funds
independent of any specific candidate campaign. They must not directly
coordinate with a candidate or party.
POLITICAL ASYLUM see asylum [POLITICAL ASYLUM].
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION see charitable contribution [POLITICAL
CONTRIBUTION].
POLITICAL CORPORATION see corporation [PUBLIC CORPORATIONS].
POLITICAL PARTY see party [POLITICAL PARTY].
POLITICAL PATRONAGE see patronage [POLITICAL PATRONAGE].
POLITICAL QUESTION a question that a court determines not to be
properly subject to judicial determination (not to be justiciable),
because resolution is committed exclusively to the jurisdiction of
another branch of government (legislative or executive), or because
adequate standards for judicial review are lacking, or because there is
no way to insure enforcement of the court’s judgment.
EXAMPLE: The Constitution provides that the Senate shall have advise
and consent power for all treaties entered into by the President with
other nations. After the Senate consents to a certain treaty, a suit is
brought challenging the extent to which the Senate deliberated over the
treaty. A court will rule that the issue is a political question that cannot
be decided by the judiciary.
POLLING THE JURY see jury [POLLING THE JURY].
POLL TAX a direct tax of a fixed amount upon all persons, or upon all
persons of a certain class, resident within a specified territory, without
regard to their property or their occupation.
POLYGAMY in criminal law, the offense of having more than one
husband or wife at one time.
POLYGRAPH a lie detector; an electromechanical instrument that
measures and records certain physiologic changes that it is believed are
involuntarily caused by the subject’s conscious attempts to deceive the
questioner. Once the machine has recorded the subject’s responses to the
questions propounded by the operator, the operator interprets the record
and determines whether the subject is lying.
PONZI SCHEME deceptive investment operation that offers
extraordinarily high rates of return that other investments cannot match,
with low risk to the investor. Such an operation pays returns to investors
from incoming deposits by new investors rather than from the profits
accrued by the investments.
POOL 1. a group or combination of individuals or entities organized for the
purpose of eliminating competition between the members and
combining their resources in order to acccomplish a benefit for each
member. A pool sufficiently large or powerful so as to restrict
competition throughout a particular trade or industry is illegal under the
Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890. 2. jury [POOL]. 3. Monies combined
for betting purposes. Such a process is often illegal under antitrust
laws. See gambling.
POPULAR NAME TABLE database of statutes listed by common or
popular name.
EXAMPLE: Bryan looked up the “Americans with Disabilities Act” in a
Popular Name Table and found that he could locate the text in the Code
at 42 U.S.C. § 12101.
PORDITION see treason.
PORNOGRAPHY books, magazines, films, pictures, and other such
material depicting sexual acts that appeal to one’s prurient interest.
See obscene material.
PORTFOLIO a group of securities held by an individual or institutional
investor, which may contain a variety of common and preferred stocks,
corporate and municipal bonds, certificates of deposit and treasury
bills—that is, appropriate selections from the equity, capital and money
markets. See income [PORTFOLIO INCOME].
POSITIVE FRAUD see fraud [FRAUD IN FACT].
POSITIVE LAW standards of conduct dictated by validly enacted laws,
rather than by principles of natural law.
POSITIVISM in jurisprudence, the view that any legal system is best
studied by concentrating on the positive law of that system. Compare
natural law.
POSSE see in posse.
POSSE COMITATUS (po*’-sa@ko*m-ĭ-tä’-tus) Lat.: able to be an attendant.
Refers to those called to attend the sheriff to assist him in making an
arrest for a felony. A person so summoned is neither an officer nor a
mere private person, but occupies the legal position of a posse
comitatus, and, while acting under the sheriff’s orders, is as much
clothed with the protection of the law as the sheriff himself. See
immunity.
POSSESSION the having, holding or detention of property in one’s
control. When distinguished from mere custody, possession involves
custody plus the assertion of a right to exercise dominion.
ACTUAL POSSESSION immediate and direct physical control over
property. In real property, it involves actual occupation of the property
or direct appropriation of the benefits it yields.
EXAMPLE: Yuna is in actual possession of betting slips in her pocket
because she knows what they are; has knowledge of their character (as
illegal items) and has them on her person.
ADVERSE POSSESSION see adverse possession.
CHOSE IN POSSESSION see chose [CHOSE IN POSSESSION].
CONSTRUCTIVE POSSESSION the condition of having the conscious power
and intention to exercise control over property, but without direct
control or actual presence upon it.
EXAMPLE: Kent is arrested for unlawful possession of handguns found in
the trunk of his car. Kent argues that he did not have actual possession
of the guns, since the trunk was locked and he was driving the car.
Although that fact may be true, he is still liable for prosecution if he had
constructive possession, which in this case is shown by the fact that he
is the only person with keys to the trunk.
CRIMINAL POSSESSION possession for which criminal sanctions are
provided, because the thing (or property) either may not lawfully be
possessed, may not be possessed by a particular category of persons or
may not be possessed under certain circumstances.
HOSTILE POSSESSION see hostile possession.
NOTORIOUS POSSESSION see notorious possession.
PEACEABLE POSSESSION see peaceable possession.
POSSESSORY ACTION a lawsuit brought for the purpose of obtaining or
maintaining possession of real property. See tenancy [TENANCY AT
SUFFERANCE].
POSSESSORY INTEREST a right to exert exclusive control over certain
land, coupled with intent to exercise that right. Compare
remainderman.
POSSIBILITY OF A REVERTER the possibility of the return of an
estate to the grantor, should a specified event occur or a particular act
be performed in the future. It is thus a reversionary interest subject to a
CONDITION PRECEDENT (see condition). The possibility does not itself
constitute an estate, present or future. It describes the interest remaining
in the grantor who conveys a conditional or determinable fee.
EXAMPLE: A father conveys a piece of real estate to his daughter as long
as she remains unmarried. The possibility of the land returning to the
father or his estate if the daughter marries creates a possibility of a
reverter in the father.
Compare reentry.
POSSLQ see CUPOS [POSSLQ].
POSTCONVICTION RELIEF PROCEEDINGS [PCR ACTIONS] a
statutory or court rule procedure whereby a criminal defendant may
challenge collaterally a judgment of conviction that has otherwise
become final in the normal appellate review process. See collateral
[COLLATERAL ATTACK]. Compare habeas corpus.
A writ of coram nobis is available in some states as a form of PCR.
In other states an out-of-time motion for a new trial to correct a
miscarriage of justice can afford this relief.
POST FACTO see ex post facto.
POST HOC ERGO PROPTER HOC (po@st ho@k eWr’-go@ prôp’-teWr ho@k)
Lat.: after this, therefore because of this; a maxim setting forth the false
logic that because one event occurs after another event, it was caused by
the prior event.
POSTING to affix physically in order to display. 1. In civil procedure,
posting of certain required information is a substitute form of service of
process; 2. In commercial law, posting is the procedure that a bank
follows in deciding to finally pay a negotiable instrument and in
recording its payment. It includes verifying any signature, ascertaining
that sufficient funds are available, marking the item paid, charging the
customer’s account and correcting or reversing an entry or erroneous
action with regard to the item; 3. Posting also refers to the exhibition of
notices on real property, warning potential trespassers that trespass for
fishing or hunting is not permitted by the property owner.
POST MORTEM (po@st môr’-te*m) Lat.: after death. Examination of the
body of a deceased to determine cause of death; may comprehend only
examination by a coroner and may consequently not produce a true
medical determination of cause of death, which involves autopsy and
dissection. See inquest.
POSTNUPTIAL AGREEMENT an agreement entered into by a married
couple to determine the rights of each in the other’s property in the
event of death or divorce. Generally, each spouse must disclose his or
her assets to the other and must have independent counsel for a
postnuptial agreement to be valid. Even then, most jurisdictions will not
permit a postnuptial agreement unless it is made to accommodate the
rights of the parties in an already failing marriage. See separation
agreement. Compare prenuptial agreement.
POT slang for marijuana. See controlled substance [CANNABIS].
POUROVER 1. a provision in a will, or a whole will, that distributes
money or other valuables to a previously established trust; 2. in rare
instances, a provision in a trust placing the trust assets in a will.
POVERTY AFFIDAVIT document detailing financial circumstances
which is required to qualify a person as indigent.
POWER, COMMERCE see power, constitutional [COMMERCE POWER].
POWER, CONSTITUTIONAL in a constitutional form of government,
enumerated and implied power vested in a particular branch or
designated authority, for example, the spending power and the taxing
power under the United States Constitution. In addition, the COMMERCE
POWER describes the whole range of authority granted the Congress to
regulate interstate commerce. See inherent powers [INHERENT
CONSTITUTIONAL POWERS]; necessary and proper clause; privileges
and immunities.
POWER, CORPORATE a corporation’s capacity or right to do certain
acts or engage in certain activities, such as to sue or be sued, to enter
into contracts, to borrow money, and to do such other things as are
necessary to obtain its purposes.
POWER COUPLED WITH AN INTEREST a power over property that
is accompanied by or connected with an interest in the property subject
to the power. Under the law of agency, when an agent has a power over
property and also has a beneficial interest in that property, the principal
may not revoke the agent’s power until the interest has expired or unless
the principal and agent have agreed otherwise.
POWER, DELEGATED see delegate [DELEGATED POWER].
POWER, ENUMERATED see enumerated powers.
POWER, IMPLIED see implied powers.
POWER, INHERENT see inherent powers.
POWER OF ACCEPTANCE the ability of an offeree to create a binding
contract by consenting to the terms of an offer. An offer can be
accepted only by the individual invited by the offeror to furnish the
consideration.
The power of acceptance is always terminated by rejection or
counteroffer by the offeree, revocation by the offeror, lapse of time
specified in the offer, or death or incapacity of the offeror or offeree.
POWER OF APPOINTMENT authority given to a person to dispose of
property of another, or of an interest therein. The authority must be to
do an act that the grantor of the authority might lawfully do. Title to the
property or interest passes directly from the donor of the power; the
party having the power of appointment acts merely as a conduit through
which title passes.
A power of appointment does not itself constitute an estate or
interest, but the donee of the power may also be granted, in the same
instrument, a present or future interest in the subject or property over
which the power is to be exercised. The donee is then said to have a
POWER COUPLED WITH AN INTEREST.
Powers of appointment are exercisable inter vivos (by deed or
similar instrument) or by testamentary disposition (will.) A GENERAL
POWER may be exercised by the donee in favor of any person(s) he or
she chooses, including himself or herself or his or her estate. The donee
of a SPECIAL POWER is limited in the choice of beneficiaries by the
donor of the power, and so must appoint in favor of member(s) of the
class specified in the instrument creating the power.
EXAMPLE: A trust instrument created by a grandmother gives her son a
special power of appointment to distribute the income generated by the
trust principal to all of the grandmother’s living grandchildren. The son
has no power to touch the principal, but he has discretion to determine
which grandchildren get how much of the interest.
POWER OF ATTORNEY an instrument in writing by which one person,
as principal, appoints another as his or her agent and confers upon him
or her the authority to perform certain specified acts or kinds of acts on
behalf of the principal. The primary purpose of a power of attorney is to
evidence the authority of the agent to third parties with whom the agent
deals.
POWER OF DISPOSITION see power of appointment.
POWER OF POLICE see police power.
PP. pages.
PPACA see affordable care act.
PRACTICE refers to the rules governing all aspects of a court proceeding.
PRAECIPE (pre@’-si-peW) Lat.: order; command. A writ commanding the
defendant to do the thing required or to show reason why it has not been
done. The clerk of the court is ordered by a praecipe to issue an
execution for a judgment creditor.
PRAESENTI see in praesenti.
PRAYER (FOR RELIEF) request contained in a complaint or petition
that asks for relief to which plaintiff thinks himself entitled.
PREAMBLE an introductory clause in a constitution, statute or other
legal instrument that states the intent or underlying reason for the
instrument.
PRECATORY advisory or in the form of a recommendation or request
rather than a command; applied to language, usually in a trust or a will,
by which the settlor or testator expresses a wish to benefit another but
does not impose an enforceable obligation upon any party to carry out
this wish. Depending upon how equivocal the language is, the trust or
disposition may or may not be enforceable by the person whose benefit
the testator seeks. See trusts [PRECATORY TRUSTS].
EXAMPLE: Valentina’s will leaves her home to her son. Other language in
the will provides that if her home is ever sold by the son, she hopes that
it will be sold to some other member of the family. That precatory
language creates a doubt as to whether the son has an obligation to sell
the house to another family member and as to what will happen should
the son sell to someone else.
PRECEDENT previously decided case recognized as authority for the
disposition of future cases. In common law, precedents were regarded
as the major source of law. A precedent may involve a novel question of
common law or it may involve an interpretation of a statute. To the
extent that future cases rely upon the precedent or distinguish it from
themselves without disapproving of it, the case will serve as a precedent
for future cases under the doctrine of stare decisis.
PRECEDENT CONDITION see condition [CONDITION PRECEDENT].
PRECEDING ESTATE a prior estate upon which a future interest is
limited. Thus, a remainder is said to vest upon the termination of a
preceding estate, such as a life estate.
PRECLUSION OF ISSUE see estoppel; issue preclusion.
PREEMPTION a doctrine based on the supremacy clause of the federal
constitution, under which a state may be deprived of jurisdiction over
matters embraced by an Act of Congress, regardless of whether the state
law coincides with, is complementary to or opposes the federal
legislation. When Congress legislates in an area of federal concern, it
may specifically preempt all state legislation (thus OCCUPYING THE
FIELD) or may bar only inconsistent legislation; where Congress does
not directly indicate its intention in this regard, the court will determine
that intention based on the nature and legislative history of the
enactment.
EXAMPLE: A state owns a railroad that operates in interstate commerce
and uses guidelines to insure safety. Congress then passes legislation
establishing greater safety requirements for railroads nationwide. Since
Congress has the power to regulate interstate commerce, its guidelines
preempt the state guidelines and the state must follow the national
requirements.
State legislatures may preempt local governments in the same
manner.
In international law, the term expresses the right of a nation to detain
goods of a stranger in transit so as to afford its citizens a chance to
purchase those goods.
PREEMPTIVE RIGHTS the right specified in the charter of a
corporation, granting to existing shareholders the first opportunity to
buy a new issue of stock. Corporations implement such a charter
provision by distributing, in advance of a new issue, subscription rights
or warrants to existing shareholders in proportion to their current
holdings. Shareholders have the choice of exercising the rights by
purchasing shares of the new issue or of selling the rights in the open
market. Rights usually have market value due to pricing of the new
issue slightly below the prevailing market.
PREFERENCE the paying or securing by an insolvent debtor, to one or
more of his or her creditors, the whole or a part of their claims, to the
exclusion or detriment of other creditors. Under the Bankruptcy Act, a
bankrupt is deemed to have given a preference if within four months
preceding the filing of his or her petition for bankruptcy, he or she
procures or suffers a judgment against himself or herself, or makes a
transfer of any of his or her assets; the effect of this is to give a creditor
a greater percentage of his or her debt than any other creditor of the
same class.
VOIDABLE PREFERENCE a transfer of property by a bankrupt person to a
creditor within a specified time period of filing the petition in
bankruptcy. Because such transfers deprive the bankrupt’s other
creditors from sharing in the property, the transfer is set aside and the
property is brought back into the bankrupt’s estate.
PREFERENCE ITEMS see tax preference items.
PREFERRED DIVIDEND see dividend [PREFERRED DIVIDEND].
PREFERRED RIGHTS see First Amendment [PREFERRED RIGHTS].
PREFERRED STOCK part of the CAPITAL STOCK (see capital) of a
corporation that enjoys priority over the remaining stock, or common
stock, in the distribution of profits and, in the event of dissolution of the
corporation, in the distribution of assets as well. See security
[PREFERRED STOCK].
PREGNANT, NEGATIVE see negative pregnant.
PREJUDICE bias; a leaning toward one party in a lawsuit; a prejudging of
a case. See dismissal [DISMISSAL WITH PREJUDICE; DISMISSAL WITHOUT
PREJUDICE].
PREJUDICIAL ERROR see reversible error.
PRELIMINARY HEARING in criminal law, 1. a hearing, before
indictment, to determine whether probable cause for the arrest of a
person existed; 2. a hearing to determine whether there is sufficient
evidence to warrant the defendant’s continued detention and whether
submission of such evidence to the GRAND JURY (see jury) is warranted.
Compare arraignment. See fair hearing.
PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION see injunction; restraining order
[TEMPORARY RESTRAINING ORDER].
PREMEDITATION forethought. As one of the elements of first-degree
murder, the term is often equated with intent and deliberateness.
PREMISE in logic, the propositions upon which a conclusion is based.
PREMISES land and its appurtenances; land or a portion thereof and the
structures thereon. For purposes of insurance on a building, or in
defining the crime of burglary, or with respect to the scope of a search
warrant, the range of the term may vary.
EXAMPLE: A search warrant lists 118 South Street as the premises to be
searched. If there is a garage at 118 South Street that is not attached to
the house, the warrant would not extend to the garage. It is not
considered part of the premises, because a search warrant must list with
particularity the places to be searched. To cover the garage, the warrant
would have to list 118 South Street and the adjacent garage.
With respect to Workers’ Compensation Acts, premises may
include any place where the employee may go in the course of his
employment.
PREMIUM 1. the sum paid to the insurer as consideration for a policy of
insurance; 2. money paid by a buyer for an option to buy or sell
corporate stock; 3. a reward for an act done.
PRENUPTIAL AGREEMENT an agreement entered into by two people
who intend to marry each other, which sets forth the rights of each
person in the property of the other in the event of divorce or death.
Generally, the entering into marriage constitutes sufficient consideration
to make a prenuptial agreement enforceable. Such an agreement is also
termed an ANTENUPTIAL AGREEMENT.
PREPONDERANCE OF THE EVIDENCE general standard of proof in
civil cases. The phrase refers to the degree of proof that will lead the
TRIER OF FACT (see fact finder) to find that the existence of the fact in
issue is more probable than not. See clear and convincing.
PREROGATIVE WRIT a written order issued by a court in furtherance of
its discretionary powers. The prerogative writs are the writs of
procedendo, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto, habeas corpus
and certiorari.
EXAMPLE: A corporation files a suit in federal district court challenging a
part of a federal securities statute. It loses in the district court and also in
the Court of Appeals. It asks the Supreme Court to issue a writ of
certiorari to the Court of Appeals so that the Supreme Court can rule on
the question. The Supreme Court has the discretion to issue the writ,
making the writ a prerogative writ.
PRESCRIPTION a means of acquiring an easement on the land of
another by continued regular use over a specified period of time.
Compare adverse possession.
PRESCRIPTIVE EASEMENT see easement [PRESCRIPTIVE EASEMENT
[EASEMENT BY PRESCRIPTION]].
PRESENT DANGER see clear and present danger.
PRESENTENCE REPORT material prepared by a probation department
to assist the trial court in sentencing a criminal defendant after he or she
has been convicted. Pre-sentence reports usually include prior
convictions, prior arrests, employment history, education history, and
family and social background.
PRESENTMENT 1. a written accusation of crime by the GRAND JURY (see
jury) upon its own initiative, without consent or participation of a
prosecutor, in the exercise of the jury’s lawful inquisitorial powers; 2.
the presenting of a bill of exchange or promissory note to the party on
whom it is drawn, for his or her acceptance, or to the person bound to
pay, for payment.
PRESENT SENSE IMPRESSION a statement describing or explaining
an event or condition made while the declarant was perceiving the event
or condition, or immediately thereafter.
For this exception to apply, the declarant need not be excited or
otherwise emotionally affected by the event or condition perceived. The
trustworthiness of the statement arises from its timing. The requirement
of contemporaneousness, or near contemporaneousness, reduces the
chance of premeditated prevarication or loss of memory. Compare
excited utterance. See also res gestae.
PRESIDENTIAL PROCLAMATION see proclamation [PRESIDENTIAL
PROCLAMATION].
PRESUMPTION an assumption of fact resulting from a rule of law that
requires such fact to be assumed from another fact or set of facts. The
term indicates that the law accords to a given evidentiary fact heavy
enough weight to require the production of contrary evidence to
overcome the assumption thereby established. This rule of evidence
thus has the effect of shifting either the burden of proof or the burden
of producing evidence.
EXAMPLE: Burton writes a check to a car repair establishment that the
bank refuses to cash. The law in Burton’s state establishes a
presumption that he knowingly intended to write a bad check if (1) there
is no account in Burton’s name at the bank named on the check or (2)
the shop was refused payment for lack of funds within thirty days of the
date on the check and Burton did not pay the amount owed within ten
days of being informed of the bank’s refusal to honor the check.
Compare inference.
CONCLUSIVE [NONREBUTTABLE] PRESUMPTION one that no evidence,
however strong, no argument, or consideration will be permitted to
overcome. Since a presumption always properly refers to a rebuttable
assumption of fact, when the term presumption is used in this
conclusive sense, it is not a true presumption but is a statement by the
court of a rule of law.
REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION an ordinary presumption that, as a matter of
law, must be made once certain facts have been proved, thus
establishing a certain conclusion prima facie; but it may be rebutted. If
it is not overcome through contrary evidence, it becomes conclusive.
The prevailing doctrine is that competing facts are weighed on their
own merits, without further reference to the presumption.
PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE prevailing assumption that the
accused is innocent until proven guilty. Because of this presumption,
the government bears the burden of proof that the defendant is guilty
beyond a reasonable doubt.
PRESUMPTIVE EVIDENCE evidence that is indirect or circumstantial;
prima facie evidence or evidence that is not conclusive and admits of
explanation or contradiction; evidence that must be treated as sufficient
unless rebutted by other evidence, such as evidence that a statute deems
to be presumptive of another fact unless rebutted.
PRETERMITTED HEIR an heir who was born after a decedent
executed his or her will, but before he or she died. Because the heir was
not alive when the testator executed the will, the pretermitted heir is not
mentioned in and may not take under the will. However, most states
have statutes that allow a child of the decedent who was born after the
will was executed but before the time of death to take a share of the
decedent’s estate equal to the share the child would have received if the
decedent had died intestate. A child who may so take a share of the
decedent’s estate is called a pretermitted heir.
PRETRIAL CONFERENCE in civil procedure, a conference held after
the pleadings have been filed and before the trial begins, for the purpose
of bringing the parties together to outline discovery proceedings and
define the issues to be tried. Courts often use the pretrial conference as
an opportunity to encourage settlement.
In criminal procedure, a pretrial conference is also used to review
evidentiary issues prior to trial, but because of the privilege against selfincrimination and the presumption of innocence, it is not as
comprehensive or useful to the parties as in civil cases.
PRETRIAL DETAINEE see detention [PRETRIAL DETAINEE].
PRETRIAL DETENTION see detention [PRETRIAL DETENTION].
PRETRIAL DISCOVERY see discovery.
PRETRIAL INTERVENTION [PTI] a remedial program by which firsttime or petty criminal offenders are not subjected to the regular judicial
process, but rather are immediately placed under probationary
supervision for a period usually no longer than one year. The program
allows persons accused of crime to avoid the stigma of conviction and a
permanent criminal record by correcting their criminal behavior during
the period of probation. Pre-conviction probationary programs divert
persons from the ordinary criminal process without an admission of
guilt or a conviction, and, for this reason, are called DIVERSIONARY
PROGRAMS.
PREVAILING PARTY the party in a lawsuit who has successfully
obtained a judgment in his or her own favor. Federal law allows for the
awarding of attorney’s fees to the prevailing party, other than the United
States, in proceedings in vindication of civil rights. Courts have
broadened the interpretation of “prevailing party” in such a context to
include preliminary relief or relief obtained as the result of a consent
decree, or settlement, and the party need only prevail on the merits of
some of the claims. The plaintiff’s lawsuit must be found to be causally
linked to the achievement of relief obtained, and the defendant must not
have acted gratuitously in response to a frivolous or legally insignificant
claim.
PREVARICATION deceitful, dishonest, or unfaithful conduct.
PREVENTIVE DETENTION pretrial confinement imposed upon a
criminal defendant under the terms of a statute authorizing the denial of
bail to certain defendants charged with particular offenses. A hearing is
required at which the court must determine that the defendant is likely
to be found guilty of an enumerated serious offense and that he or she
poses an immediate danger to the public if released on bail. The
constitutionality of preventive detention has been upheld by one court
but has yet to receive review by the United States Supreme Court. Only
a small number of jurisdictions have such statutes. In many instances,
however, the same result is accomplished de facto by a magistrate
setting bail beyond a defendant’s reach. See detention.
PRICE DISCRIMINATION the practice of charging different persons
different prices for the same goods or services. When price
discrimination is engaged in for the purpose of lessening competition,
for instance, through tying the lower prices to the purchase of other
goods or services, it constitutues a violation of the Sherman Antitrust
Act. Unlawful price discrimination is also specifically covered by the
Clayton Act, and the Robinson-Patman Act.
PRICE FIXING under federal antitrust laws, a combination or
conspiracy for the purpose and with the effect of raising, lowering or
stabilizing the price of a commodity in interstate commerce.
HORIZONTAL PRICE FIXING price fixing engaged in by competitors at the
same commercial level.
VERTICAL PRICE FIXING price fixing engaged in by members of different
levels of production, such as manufacturer and retailer.
PRIEST-PENITENT PRIVILEGE communications made by a person to
a priest, rabbi, or minister in the course of confession, or similar course
of discipline by other religious bodies, that are privileged from
disclosure. The communications to clergy members must be made while
clergy members are acting in the professional capacity of a spiritual
adviser and with the purpose of dispensing religious counsel, advice,
solace, or absolution. Some states have broadened their privilege to
include all forms of individual or group counseling for marital and other
personal problems. The definition of “clergy” is the subject of
controversy, but has not been found to include nuns.
PRIMAE IMPRESSIONIS (prῑ’-me@ im-pre*-she*-o@-nis) Lat.: first
impression.
PRIMA FACIE (prῑ’-maW fa@’-shaW) Lat.: at first view, on its face. Not
requiring further support to establish existence, validity, credibility.
EXAMPLE: Sylvain is caught with untaxed cigarettes. In the state where he
is caught, untaxed cigarettes are designated prima facie contraband and
are immediately subject to forfeiture to the state.
PRIMA FACIE CASE 1. a case sufficient on its face, supported by at least
the requisite minimum of evidence, and free from obvious defects; 2.
state of facts that entitles a party to have his case go to the jury;
sufficient to avoid a directed verdict or a motion to dismiss; 3. a case
that will usually prevail in the absence of contradictory evidence; 4. a
case in which the evidence is sufficient to support, but not to compel, a
certain conclusion and does no more than furnish evidence to be
weighed, but not necessarily to be accepted, by the TRIER OF FACT (see
fact finder).
PRIMARY DISTRIBUTION see underwriting.
PRIMARY LIABILITY see liability [PRIMARY LIABILITY].
PRIMARY OFFERING see underwriting.
PRIMOGENITURE (pre@-mo@-je*n’-ĭ-tu@r) ancient common law doctrine
governing descent, under which the eldest son takes all property of
decedent father. The opposite of primogeniture, BOROUGH ENGLISH,
existed under local custom in at least one jurisdiction even while
primogeniture prevailed elsewhere in England; the youngest son
inherited on the death of the father. Under the local custom of
gavelkind all sons took equally. In the event all issue of the decedent
were daughters, they took equal shares in coparceny.
PRINCIPAL most important. 1. in criminal law, one who commits an
offense, or an accomplice actually or constructively present during
commission of the offense. 2. in commercial law, the amount received
in loan, or the amount upon which interest is charged; 3. in the law of
agency, one who has permitted or engaged another to act for his or her
benefit, in accordance with his or her direction and subject to his or her
control. 4. chief, superintendent. Compare principle.
DISCLOSED PRINCIPAL one whose identity is known to the party dealing
with the agent.
PARTIALLY DISCLOSED PRINCIPAL one whose identity is not known, but
whose existence is known, to the party with whom the agent deals.
UNDISCLOSED PRINCIPAL one of whose existence the party dealing with
the agent is not aware—i.e., the third party does not know he or she is
dealing with an agent.
EXAMPLE: Tara buys property for Sphinx Mall Company. Sphinx desires
to be an undisclosed principal because it believes that land prices would
skyrocket if sellers knew the identity of the real purchaser.
PRINCIPLE fundamental doctrine; a settled rule. Compare principal.
PRIOR INCONSISTENT STATEMENT in evidence, a witness’s out-ofcourt statement that contradicts his or her testimony in court; a prior
inconsistent statement may constitute hearsay, since the evidence of the
prior inconsistent statement may be based only on the witness’s out-ofcourt statement rather than the evidence about which he or she testified.
Regardless of its character as hearsay, a prior inconsistent statement is
nonetheless admissible in evidence for purposes of impeaching the
witness. Extrinsic evidence of a prior inconsistent statement is not
admissible unless the witness is first given the opportunity to explain or
deny the same, and the opposite party is given an opportunity for
interrogation thereon, or the interests of justice otherwise require.
Compare admission by a party-opponent; declaration against
interest.
PRIORITY preference; the condition of coming before, or of coming first,
in a bankruptcy proceeding; the right to be paid before other creditors
out of the assets of the bankrupt party. The term may also be used to
signify such a right in connection with a prior lien, prior mortgage, etc.
PRIOR LIEN a first or superior lien, entitled to satisfaction before others.
PRIOR RESTRAINT any prohibition on the publication or
communication of information prior to such publication, or
communication under the First Amendment’s guarantees of the right to
free speech and free press. Prior restraints are subject to strict scrutiny
and bear a heavy presumption against constitutional validity.
PRISON see jail, penal institution.
PRISONER generally, anyone who is held against his or her will.
Specifically, one who has been committed to a prison, jail, or penal
institution for the purpose of detention until he or she may be tried for
a crime of which he or she is accused, or for the purpose of punishment
after conviction of such crime. See detention; sentence. Compare
inmate.
PRIVACY see privacy, right of.
PRIVACY, INVASION OF see invasion of privacy.
PRIVACY, RIGHT OF a general right to be left alone, including
protections from governmental interference in personal relationships or
activities. It allows the individual freedom to make fundamental choices
involving oneself, one’s family and one’s relationship with others but it
is not absolute and does not apply to private conduct which is harmful
to individual participants or to society.
The federal constitution does not specifically provide for this right
but zones of privacy have been implied from the general thrust of the
Bill of Rights, specifically the First, Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Ninth
Amendments through the Fourteenth Amendment. Such privacy rights
include the right to have an abortion (subject to certain state
regulations), or to keep certain types of information private.
An INVASION OF PRIVACY constitutes a tort for which remedies are
available. Examples of different types of torts are: (1) appropriation
(the use of a person’s name, picture, or likeness as a symbol of his or
her identity without compensation); (2) an intrusion upon a person’s
physical solitude or seclusion; (3) the public disclosure of private facts;
and (4) placing a person in a false light in the public eye by associating
this person with beliefs or activities with which this person has no
connection.
PRIVATE CORPORATION see corporation [PRIVATE CORPORATION].
PRIVATE DWELLING see dwelling house [PRIVATE DWELLING].
PRIVATE FOUNDATIONS see charity [PRIVATE FOUNDATIONS].
PRIVATE NECESSITY see justification [PRIVATE NECESSITY].
PRIVATE NUISANCE see nuisance [PRIVATE NUISANCE].
PRIVATE OFFERING [PLACEMENT] generally, any sale of securities
in a corporation not subject to registration requirements under the
Securities Act of 1933. Transactions by an issuer not involving any
public offering are exempt. These include placements with large
institutional investors such as insurance companies and pension funds,
securities issued to key employees of a company, and securities issued
to acquire the stock of a closely held corporation. The Securities and
Exchange Commission has general authority to issue regulations
concerning exempt transactions and is specifically authorized to issue
regulations exempting offerings if the aggregate amount of the
securities to be sold does not exceed $5,000,000. The SEC issued
REGULATION D in 1982, under which offerings of various amounts of
securities are exempt from registration if they meet specific
requirements, the most important of which is that the purchasers of the
securities by ACCREDITED INVESTORS, that is, an institutional investor
such as a bank, an insurance company, a pension fund, or a charitable
foundation with assets of at least $5 million; a director or officer of the
issuer; an individual with a minimum net worth of $1 million or a
minimum annual income of $200,000; or an individual who purchases
at least $150,000 of the securities offered, provided that the purchase
does not exceed 20 percent of his or her net worth. If the securities
issued total less than $5 million, then up to 35 percent of the purchasers
do not have to be accredited investors.
PRIVATE PLACEMENT see private offering [placement].
PRIVATE RULING see revenue ruling [PRIVATE RULING].
PRIVILEGE 1. a particular benefit enjoyed by a person, company or class
beyond the advantages of other citizens; 2. an exceptional exemption, or
an immunity held beyond the course of the law; 3. an exemption from
some burden or attendance, with which certain persons are indulged,
from a supposition of the law that the public offices or duties require so
much time and care that, without this indulgence, their duties could not
be performed to the advantage that the public good demands. See
executive privilege; informer’s privilege; privileged communication.
EXAMPLE: All citizens of a county are required to be available for jury
duty. Doctors are privileged to avoid this requirement, because of their
constant need to attend to their patients.
PRIVILEGE AGAINST SELF-INCRIMINATION see selfincrimination, privilege against.
PRIVILEGED COMMUNICATION communication that occurs in a
setting of legal or other recognized professional confidentiality.
Designating a communication as privileged allows the speakers to resist
legal process to disclose its contents. When communications are termed
privileged, a breach by one party of the concurrent confidentiality can
result in a civil suit in tort by the other party to the communication.
Communications that are privileged may include: (1) communications
in the sanctity of the marital relationship; (2) communications between
physicians and their patients; (3) communications of psychological
counselors and their clients; (4) priest-and-penitent communications; (5)
communications between attorney and client; and (6) in some
jurisdictions, communications between journalists and their sources.
See attorney-client privilege; journalist’s privilege; marital
communications privileges; physician–patient privilege (including
PSYCHOTHERAPIST–PATIENT PRIVILEGE); priest–penitent privilege;
rape crisis counselor privilege. See also informer’s privilege; selfincrimination, privilege against.
ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE an evidentiary privilege protecting the
confidential communications between a client and his or her attorney
from disclosure to any other party; can be waived by the client but not
by the attorney.
EXAMPLE: Joaquin discusses with his attorney a past wrong he is alleged
to have committed. If the attorney is asked to discuss this without
Joaquin’s permission, she will not be permitted to do so since the
communication was privileged.
PRIVILEGE FROM ARREST the right of certain persons, granted by
either a constitution, statute, or public policy, against being arrested
while engaging in certain activities. For instance, the U.S. Constitution
grants senators and representatives the privilege from arrest during their
attendence at the session of their respective houses, and in going to or
returning from the same.
PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES the phrase used in the Fourteenth
Amendment to the Constitution to describe the rights that citizens of
the United States have by virtue of their citizenship. These rights derive
from the establishment and existence of the federal government and
thus were assumed to exist prior to the enactment of the Fourteenth
Amendment. That provision makes it clear that the federal government
may protect such rights from the state as well as individual denials.
Privileges and immunities include the right to travel; the right to vote in
federal elections; the right to assemble to petition federal officers and to
discuss national legislation; and any other personal right arising out of
federal statutes. Such rights are to be distinguished from those that exist
regardless of the federal government, such as the right to assembly or of
jury trial.
PRIVITY a relationship between parties out of which arises mutuality of
interest.
HORIZONTAL PRIVITY privity of estate between the covenantor and
covenantee. Horizontal privity is satisfied any time an estate is
conveyed from one party to another, provided that the covenant is
made at the time of the transfer.
EXAMPLE: Janan sells some of her land to a neighbor, who by the sale
acquires ownership of a lake. Three months later the neighbor conveys
to Janan the right to use the lake. Janan then sells her portion of the land
to another party. That party does not have the right to use the lake. The
requirements of horizontal privity are not met because the covenant is
made after the transfer of the land between Janan and the neighbor.
PRIVITY OF CONTRACT the relationship between two or more contracting
parties. To maintain an action on any contract, there must be a privity
between the plaintiff and defendant in respect to the matter sued on.
PRIVITY OF ESTATE mutual or successive relation to the same right in the
same property. A privy in estate derives from another person’s title to
property, by contract (grant, will or other voluntary transfer of
possession) or law (descent, judgment, etc.).
VERTICAL PRIVITY the privity of estate between the covenantor and his
or her successor in interest who acquires the property subject to the
covenant.
See easement [RECIPROCAL NEGATIVE EASEMENTS]; run with the
land.
PRIVY a person connected with another or having mutual interest with him
or her in the same action or thing, by contract or otherwise.
PROBABLE CAUSE a requisite element of a valid arrest or search and
seizure; consists of knowledge of facts and circumstances sufficient in
themselves to warrant belief that a crime has been committed (in the
context of an arrest) or that property subject to seizure is at a designated
location (in the context of a search and seizure). Compare stop and
frisk.
EXAMPLE: A policeman, patrolling a high crime area where narcotics
offenses are particularly troublesome, observes two men exchange
money on a street and then go to a nearby car to retrieve a package from
the trunk. One of the men sticks his finger in the bag, puts his finger in
his mouth to taste something, stuffs the bag in his pocket and walks
away. This routine occurs several times. The owner of the vehicle is
known to the officer as a drug dealer. The policeman has probable cause
to obtain a warrant to search the vehicle and any person who receives a
package from the trunk.
PROBATE 1. act of proving that an instrument purporting to be a will was
signed and otherwise executed in accordance with the legal
requirements for a will, and of determining its validity; 2. combined
result of all procedures necessary to establish the validity of a will. In
some jurisdictions a PROBATE COURT is a special court having
jurisdiction of proceedings incident to the settlement of a decedent’s
estate. In such situations the court may appoint a committee,
conservator, or guardian. See surrogate. See also homestead
[PROBATE HOMESTEAD].
PROBATION procedure whereby a defendant found guilty of a crime,
upon a verdict or plea of guilty, is released by the court without
imprisonment, subject to conditions imposed by the court, under the
supervision of a PROBATION OFFICER. Compare parole.
PROBATIVE tending to prove a particular proposition or to persuade one
of the truth of an allegation.
PROBATIVE FACTS 1. matters of evidence required to prove ultimate
facts; 2. facts from which the ultimate and decisive facts may be
properly inferred.
PROBATIVE VALUE the relative weight properly accorded particular
evidence.
EXAMPLE: The prosecutor wants to introduce an accused’s past criminal
record as evidence of the accused’s guilt of the offense with which he is
presently charged. In the past the accused has committed similar
offenses. The accused replies that if his record is introduced, the jury
might convict him exclusively because of his prior record as opposed to
the evidence before it. The judge refuses to allow the introduction of the
evidence, finding that the probative value of the prior record is far
outweighed by the prejudicial effect it will have on the jury’s
consideration of the evidence. Although the prior record is relevant, that
relevance is not sufficient to overcome the right of the accused to be
judged on the basis of the evidence of the present offense and not upon
demonstration of a criminal disposition. If the defendant decides to
testify, the record may be used to impugn his credibility. In that event,
the court will instruct the jury that it may only consider the prior record
for that limited purpose.
PRO BONO PUBLICO (pro@bo@’-no@pu@b’-ly-ko@) Lat.: for the public good
or welfare. When an attorney takes a case without compensation to
advance a social cause, or to fill a perceived social need to offer legal
representation to the poor, the attorney represents the party pro bono
publico. The phrase pro bono is sometimes used.
PROCEDENDO (pro@-sa@-de*n’-do@) Lat.: duty to have proceeded. Refers to
a writ issued by a superior court when a cause has been improperly
removed to it, as by certiorari, commanding the inferior court from
which it was removed to assume jurisdiction and proceed to judgment
on the cause. It is more frequently called a remand.
PROCEDURAL DUE PROCESS see due process of law.
PROCEDURE legal method; the machinery for carrying on the suit,
including pleading, process, evidence and practice. The term thus
refers to the mechanics of the legal process—the body of rules and
practice by which justice is meted out by the legal system—rather than
the substance and content of the law itself. See adjective law. Compare
substantive law.
CIVIL PROCEDURE The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure guide the
federal courts in conducting all aspects of cases before them, from the
filing of a suit to the trial itself. The rules also instruct attorneys how
they must proceed with these cases. Although these rules govern only
procedure, not the actual merits of the case, a failure to abide by the
rules could easily result in a valid claim being dismissed by the court.
Each state court also has rules of procedure.
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE the process by which the government imposes
sanctions for crimes, from the investigation of the crime, through the
arrest and trial of the person accused of committing the crime, to the
punishment of the convicted criminal. The primary sources of criminal
procedure are: statutes governing police activities, court procedures and
sentencing matters; and court rules, such as the Federal Rules of
Criminal Procedure. Constitutional limitations on criminal procedure to
protect the rights of defendants are found in state and federal
guarantees, such as the ban on unreasonable searches and seizures, and
the privilege against self-incrimination.
PROCEEDING 1. the succession of events in the process of judicial
action; 2. the form in which actions are to be brought and defended, the
manner of intervening in suits, of conducting them; the mode of
deciding them, of opposing and of executing judgments.
COLLATERAL PROCEEDING any proceeding not instituted for the express
purpose of annulling, correcting, or modifying a judgment. Instead, a
collateral proceeding will attempt to change or affect the result of the
judgment while allowing the judgment to remain intact. See collateral
estoppel.
INFORMAL PROCEEDING see informal proceeding.
SUMMARY PROCEEDING see summary proceeding.
PROCESS 1. a formal writing (writ) issued by authority of law; 2. any
means used by the court to acquire or to exercise its jurisdiction over a
person or over specified property; 3. usually refers to the method used
to compel attendance of a defendant in court in a civil suit. See abuse
of process; compulsory process; due process of law; service of
process.
PROCLAMATION a public announcement giving notice of an act done by
the government or to be done by the people. A PRESIDENTIAL
PROCLAMATION is the President’s official, public announcement of an
executive order or act.
PROCTOR 1. one who manages another’s affairs, acting as that person’s
agent; 2. an attorney who is admitted to practice in a probate,
admiralty or ecclesiastical court. Compare administrator.
PRODUCT see work product.
PRODUCT EXTENSION MERGER see merger [PRODUCT EXTENSION
MERGER].
PRODUCTION BURDEN see burden of proof.
PRODUCTS LIABILITY a concept in the law of torts holding a
manufacturer strictly liable in tort when an article the manufacturer
places on the market, knowing it is to be used without inspection for
defects, proves to have a defect that causes injury to a human being.
One who sells any defective product unreasonably dangerous to the
consumer or to his or her property may be liable for physical harm
thereby caused to the consumer or to his or her property, even though
there is no contractual or other relationship between seller and user, and
even though the seller has not been negligent. See warranty.
EXAMPLE: A manufacturer sells a food processor to a department store,
which in turn sells it to Ann. The rotary mechanism in the machine has
a tendency to engage when the top of the processor is off. Ann’s finger
is cut when this problem occurs. She can sue the manufacturer under a
products liability theory.
PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATION see professional corporation
[association].
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT see code of professional responsibility;
model rules of professional conduct.
PROFESSIONAL CORPORATION [ASSOCIATION] a corporation
formed for the purpose of engaging in one of the learned professions,
such as law, medicine, or architecture. Traditionally, corporations were
prohibited from engaging in such professions because they lacked the
human, personal qualifications necessary to pursue them. However,
within recent years most states have enacted a professional corporation
or association act that allows professional persons to practice in the
corporate form provided that all shareholders are members of the
profession. A professional corporation has at least two advantages.
First, it allows a professional to join together with one or more other
professionals without assuming personal liability for the acts or
omissions of the others. Second, it allows the professional to enjoy
certain tax advantages not available to him or her as an individual
taxpayer.
PROFESSIONAL CRIMINAL see criminal [HABITUAL OFFENDER];
sentence [EXTENDED TERM].
PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITY see code of professional
responsibility; model rules of professional conduct.
PROFFER to offer evidence at trial. The admissibility of evidence so
offered is governed by the appropriate jurisdiction’s rules of evidence.
See offer of proof.
PROFILING 1. collecting and analyzing information that individuals have
provided about themselves (see registration) or information about their
web site purchases or visits for marketing purposes; 2. behavioral
analysis of serial murder suspects providing information on the
causality, motivations, and characteristics of serial killers to assist in
their apprehension; 3. police targeting of suspects by utilizing a set of
characteristics to decide whether an individual (who possesses those
characteristics) might be guilty of some crime. One method known as
RACIAL PROFILING is particularly violative of individuals’ rights because
it involves the police’s use of race as the sole factor in decisions to stop,
interrogate, or search people. However, reliance on such criteria in
combination with other identifying factors when seeking a specific
suspect whose race, ethnicity, national origin, gender, or religious dress
is part of the description of the suspect is not racial profiling.
PROFIT gain; the excess of an amount received over the amount paid for
goods and services. See capital gains or losses; earnings and profits;
paper profit; realization. See also profit à prendre.
PROFIT-AND-LOSS STATEMENT see income statement.
PROFIT À PRENDRE (pro@-fe*ah pro*n-dreW) Fr.: the right to take. In real
property law, the right to take soil, gravel, minerals, and the like from
another’s land.
PRO FORMA (pro@fôr’-maW) Lat.: for the sake of form; as a matter of form.
1. In practice, the term usually means that an appealable decree or
judgment was entered by the court, not because of an intellectual
conviction that the decision rendered was right, but merely to facilitate
further proceedings; 2. In accounting, the term is used in reference to
the presentation of financial statements that represent proposed events
in the form in which they would appear if or when the event actually
occurred. Examples include presentation of consolidated statements in
connection with a proposed corporate merger and presentation of
balance sheet data showing the effect of a proposed financing.
PROGRESSIVE TAX see tax [PROGRESSIVE TAX].
PRO HAC VICE (pro@ häk ve@’-cha@) Lat.: for this turn; for this one
particular occasion. The allowance of that which under ordinary
circumstances is not permitted. Usually the term is used to describe the
permission granted an out-of-state lawyer to appear in a particular case
with the same standing as a local attorney admitted to practice in the
jurisdiction.
PROHIBITION see writ of prohibition.
PROLIXITY any unnecessary language or facts in pleadings or in
evidence.
PROMISE a declaration of one’s intention to do or to refrain from doing
something.
BREACH OF PROMISE see breach (of contract) [BREACH OF PROMISE].
COLLATERAL PROMISE see collateral [COLLATERAL PROMISE].
GRATUITOUS PROMISE see gratuitous promise.
ILLUSORY PROMISE see illusory promise.
PROMISE, BREACH OF see breach (of contract) [BREACH OF
PROMISE].
PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL an equitable doctrine that declares that if
injustice can be avoided only by enforcement of a promise, the pledge is
binding, though there is no consideration for the promise and it cannot
therefore be enforced as a contract. The promisor, having induced in the
promisee reliance on the promise for certain action or forbearance, is
said to be estopped to deny the existence of a contract, though in fact
one has not been made. See also estoppel; waiver [EXECUTORY
WAIVER]. Compare assumpsit.
PROMISSORY NOTE a kind of negotiable instrument wherein the
maker agrees to pay a specific sum at a definite time.
PROMOTER in corporate law, generally anyone who undertakes to form a
corporation and to procure for it the rights, instrumentalities, and capital
by which it is to carry out the purpose set forth in its charter. The
Securities and Exchange Commission defines a promoter as any
person who, acting alone or in conjunction with one or more persons,
directly or indirectly takes initiative in founding or organizing the
business or enterprise of an issuer of securities or any person who
receives 10 percent or more of any class of securities of an issuer on the
proceeds therefrom in consideration for services or property.
PROOF [PROOFS] the quantity or quality of evidence that tends to
establish the existence of a fact in issue. See burden of proof; degree
of proof; inference; judgment proof; moral certainty; offer of proof;
preponderance of the evidence; presumption; reasonable doubt.
PROOF BEYOND A REASONABLE DOUBT see reasonable doubt.
PROOF TO A MORAL CERTAINTY see moral certainty.
PRO PER Lat.: in propria persona (“for oneself”) and written in pro per.
See pro se.
PROPER see necessary and proper clause.
PROPER LOOKOUT see lookout [PROPER LOOKOUT].
PROPER PARTY see party [PROPER PARTY].
PROPERTY every species of valuable right or interest that is subject to
ownership, has an exchangeable value or adds to one’s wealth or
estate. Property describes one’s exclusive right to possess, use and
dispose of a thing, as well as the object, benefit or prerogative that
constitutes the subject matter of that right.
COMMON PROPERTY 1. that which belongs to the citizenry as a whole; 2.
property owned by TENANTS IN COMMON (see tenancy), or in some
jurisdictions where designated by statute, that are owned by husband
and wife. Compare community property.
INCORPOREAL PROPERTY see incorporeal [INCORPOREAL PROPERTY].
INTANGIBLE PROPERTY see intangible property.
PERSONAL PROPERTY see personal property.
PUBLIC PROPERTY see public property.
REAL PROPERTY see real property.
TANGIBLE PROPERTY see tangible property.
PROPERTY SETTLEMENT in martrimonial law, the division of
property owned or acquired by spouses during their marriage. Since a
property settlement merely allocates the property between the parties
and does not satisfy the obligation of either spouse to support the other,
it is not subject to judicial modification if the circumstances of either
spouse later change. See postnuptial agreement; prenuptial
agreement; separation agreement.
PROPERTY TAX see tax [PROPERTY TAX].
PROPORTIONAL REPRESENTATION a system of election designed
to insure that different groups will have their interests represented,
something that may not necessarily occur in a majority rule scheme.
EXAMPLE: A university faculty is comprised of 65 percent full-time and
35 percent part-time members. Under a proportional representation
system for election of an appointments committee, each class will be
able to have a voice on the committee.
PROPRIETARY owned by a particular person. In trade secrets law,
proprietary property is information or knowledge in which the person
developing it has ownership rights. Such rights are usually protected by
contract and have not been the subject of a patent application. In the
law of municipal corporations, a proprietary function is one that a
government may undertake for the benefit of its citizens. Government
activities fall into two general categories: those fundamental to its
nature as a government, such as passing of legislation or providing
police services, and those proprietary or done for the benefit of
particular citizens, such as providing a swimming pool. Generally
speaking, a government may not be held liable for the former, but it may
be liable for negligence with regard to the latter. See governmental
function; sovereign immunity; Tort Claims Act.
PROPRIETARY INTEREST any right in relation to a chattel that
enables a person to retain its possession indefinitely or for a period of
time.
PROPRIETARY LEASE see lease [PROPRIETARY LEASE].
PROPRIETOR owner; the person who holds title to property. See
proprietary. See also sole proprietorship.
PRO RATA (pro@ra@’-taW) Lat.: according to the rate, i.e., in proportion.
According to a measure that fixes proportions. Thus, a lease terminated
by agreement before the expiration of the full term may call for the
payment of rent on a pro rata basis for the expired term of the lease.
PRO SE (pro@sa@) Lat.: for himself; in one’s own behalf. One appears pro se
in a legal action when one represents oneself without aid of counsel.
See pro per.
PROSECUTION 1. the act of pursuing a lawsuit or criminal trial; 2. the
party initiating a criminal suit, i.e., the state. Where the civil litigant, or
the state in a criminal trial, fails to move the case towards final
resolution or trial as required by the court schedule, the matter may be
dismissed for WANT OF PROSECUTION or for FAILURE TO PROSECUTE. See
malicious prosecution.
PROSECUTOR public official who prepares and conducts the
prosecution of persons accused of crime. In certain cases, the
legislature may appoint a SPECIAL PROSECUTOR to conduct a limited
investigation and prosecution. The state prosecutors are usually called
district attorneys or county prosecutors. The federal prosecutor is
known as the United States Attorney for a certain federal district. The
prosecutor is charged with the duty to see that the laws of his or her
jurisdiction are faithfully executed and enforced.
PROSECUTRIX term used to refer to the complaining witness in a rape
case; less frequently, it refers to a female prosecutor.
PROSECUTORIAL DISCRETION see discretion [PROSECUTORIAL
DISCRETION].
PROSECUTORIAL MISCONDUCT see summation [summing up]
[PROSECUTORIAL MISCONDUCT].
PROSPECTIVE future, in the future. A law or decision that is to be
applied “prospectively” is to be applied only after the date it was
enacted or decided. Constitutional decisions in the area of criminal
procedure are often applied prospectively only to minimize the
disruptive effect on law enforcement and the administration of justice. If
the new decision does not affect the integrity of the fact-finding process
and represents a clear break from prior precedent, it will be applied
prospectively only. Compare retroactive.
EXAMPLE: Richard’s conviction for selling drugs in a school zone was
overturned. In its opinion the court declared that in the future
prosecutors must prove that the school was in session at the time of the
offense. Loni was convicted before Richard under similar facts yet her
conviction will not be overturned since the court specifically applied
their ruling to only Richard’s case and those that follow.
PROSPECTUS a document that discloses financial information about a
corporation to potential investors and explains the company’s plans and
objectives. Under federal securities acts, a corporation making a public
offering of its securities must file a copy of its prospectus with the
Securities and Exchange Commission and must provide a copy of it to
each purchaser of securities.
PROSTITUTION the giving or receiving of the body for sexual
intercourse for hire. A person who sells his or her body for sexual
intercourse is a PROSTITUTE. See pander; solicitation.
PRO TANTO (pro@tän’-to@) Lat.: for so much; to the extent, but only to the
extent.
PROTECT [PROTECTION] to preserve in safety; to keep intact; to take
care of and to keep safe. “Protection” is any measure that attempts to
preserve that which already exists. For instance, trade protection
attempts to preserve domestic industry through the imposition of tariffs
and custom duties on imported goods. See tariff [PROTECTIVE TARIFF];
see also consumer protection.
PROTECTIVE CUSTODY the confinement of an individual by the state
in order to protect the individual from being harmed either by himself or
herself or some other person. For instance, a prisoner who is the subject
of attack by other prisoners will be segregated from those prisoners and
placed in protective custody.
PROTECTIVE ORDER any order issued for the purpose of protecting a
party from some abuse of the legal system. Under federal rules of civil
procedure the court may make any order that justice requires to protect
a party or person from annoyance, embarrassment, oppression or undue
burden or expense. The rule specifically mentions various discovery
matters, including the time, place, and subject matter of discovery, and
the protection of trade secrets. Under federal rules of criminal procedure
the court is specifically authorized to limit discovery in criminal cases
as may be appropriate.
PRO TEMPORE [PRO TEM] (pro@te*m’-po@-ra@) Lat.: for the time being.
PROTEST 1. a demand for payment of a note, its nonpayment, and
consequent dishonor; 2. a formal certification by a consul, notary or
the like that an instrument has been dishonored. A protest must
identify the instrument and certify that due presentment has been
made, or show why it has been excused, and that the instrument has
been dishonored by non-acceptance or nonpayment.
EXAMPLE: Fernando deposits one of his customer’s checks in the bank,
but the check is returned for lack of sufficient funds in the customer’s
account. Fernando files a protest with the customer and demands that
the debt now be paid in cash.
PROTHONOTARY in some jurisdictions, a chief clerk of the court.
PROVISIONAL REMEDY see remedy [PROVISIONAL REMEDY].
PROVISO a condition or stipulation. Its general function is to except
something from the basic provision, to qualify or restrain its general
scope, or to prevent misinterpretation.
PROXIMATE CAUSE see cause [PROXIMATE CAUSE].
PROXY 1. recipient of a grant of authority to act or speak for another; 2.
one permitted to vote in place of a stockholder of a corporation, who
is thereby presumably voicing the will of his or her principal. 3. the
instrument used to grant this authority.
PRUDENT MAN [PERSON] RULE a flexible legal investment standard
that allows a fiduciary to purchase securities that a person of discretion
and intelligence would choose to earn a reasonable income and to
preserve the principal. See also trustee.
EXAMPLE: A father sets up a trust for his two sons, naming a bank as
trustee. The trust instrument provides no definition of how the trust
principal should be invested. The trustee is bound by the prudent-person
rule and must purchase securities that may not offer the highest return
possible but are very safe investments.
PRURIENT INTEREST shameful and morbid interest in nudity, sex, or
excretion. It is one criterion in determining whether or not something is
obscene. See obscenity.
P.S. public statute.
PSYCHOTHERAPIST-PATIENT PRIVILEGE see physician-patient
privilege [PSYCHOTHERAPIST-PATIENT PRIVILEGE].
PTI see pretrial intervention.
PUB. L. public law.
PUBLICATION the act of making something known to the public. Also
the document itself, such as a newspaper or book. Publication can be
accomplished by a physical posting (such as placing a paper on a
bulletin board), an electronic Internet posting, or by a printed method,
such as a magazine or newsletter. Publication of slander can constitute
defamation. It can also be a means of service (of process) of a legal
document (such as notice of a class action suit, a legal name change or a
sheriff’s sale) if statutory requirements are followed. See notice.
PUBLICATION, SERVICE BY see service [SERVICE BY PUBLICATION].
PUBLIC CHARITY see charity [PUBLIC CHARITY].
PUBLIC CORPORATION see corporation [PUBLIC cORPORATION].
PUBLIC DEFENDER an attorney hired by the government to defend
persons accused of crimes and unable to afford an attorney. Under the
Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments, a defendant in a criminal
proceeding who faces possible incarceration if convicted, is entitled to
the assistance of counsel in conducting his or her defense, and an
attorney must be provided at government expense if the defendant is
indigent.
PUBLIC DOCUMENT see public record.
PUBLIC DOMAIN 1. all lands and waters in the possession of the United
States, and all lands owned by the several states, as distinguished from
lands possessed by private individuals or corporations; 2. information,
the source of which is available to anyone and is not subject to
copyright.
PUBLIC EASEMENT any easement enjoyed by the public in general,
such as the right of passage over the surface of streets and highways.
Also called a DEDICATION, meaning that use of the land has been
devoted for such purposes by the owner of the fee.
EXAMPLE: A developer wants to construct a tall office building but needs
part of the sidewalk adjacent to the area. The city is willing to allow this
infringement of a public easement if the builder will provide other
access to the public, such as an open passageway through the building
or an alternate facility for public usage.
PUBLIC FIGURE in libel law, a person of general fame or notoriety in the
community, and extensive involvement in the affairs of society. Under
the First Amendment, a public figure is required to show actual malice
before recovering damages for libel.
PUBLIC INTEREST that which is best for society as a whole; a
subjective determination by an individual such as a judge or governor,
or a group such as a township committee or state legislature or what is
for the general good of all people. Providing an adequate education and
maintaining libraries, hospitals, and playgrounds are examples of
concerns that are in the public interest.
AFFECTED WITH A PUBLIC INTEREST connotes the need for regulation. An
example of a business affected with a public interest would be a public
utility. PUBLIC POLICY is virtually synonymous with public interest but
tends to have more specific connotations. For example, police act in the
public interest but public policy dictates that citizens shall not be
subjected to undue detention or arrest. AGAINST PUBLIC POLICY is a
determination that a specified act or course of conduct does not further
society’s best interests. Usage of drugs within a private residence is
nonetheless illegal as against the public policy of a drug-free society.
PUBLIC NECESSITY see justification [PUBLIC NECESSITY].
PUBLIC NUISANCE see nuisance [PUBLIC [COMMON] NUISANCE].
PUBLIC OFFERING see offer [OFFERING].
PUBLIC OFFICIAL any elected or appointed person holding a public
office and having duties relating to the sovereign powers of
government. The term does not apply to public employees having
purely ministerial duties.
PUBLIC POLICY see public interest [PUBLIC POLICY].
PUBLIC PROPERTY that which is dedicated to the use of the public, or
that over which the state has dominion; describes the use to which the
property is put, or the character of its ownership. Compare public
domain; public easement.
PUBLIC PURPOSE generally, the goal of society to benefit its citizens.
Specifically, the doctrine examining governmental action and measuring
the ultimate benefit to the public, as with the taking of private property
to build a private correctional facility. See eminent domain; public
use.
PUBLIC RECORD any record a governmental body is required by law to
keep, and that must be filed and be accessible to the public.
PUBLIC SALE see sale [PUBLIC SALE].
PUBLIC SECURITIES see securities [PUBLIC SECURITIES].
PUBLIC TRIAL see open court.
PUBLIC TRUST 1. CHARITABLE TRUST (see trust); 2. the public’s
confidence reposed in their elected officials and expectation that these
elected officials will faithfully perform the duties of public office.
PUBLIC TRUST DOCTRINE A doctrine under which the state is said to own
lands lying under navigable waters and to hold such lands in trust for
the benefit of the people of the state. According to this doctrine, these
submerged lands may not be sold or otherwise alienated by the state
except in a manner that promotes the public interest.
PUBLIC USE the public’s right to use or to benefit from the use of
property condemned by the government through the exercise of its
power of eminent domain. One of the limitations upon the use of this
power is that property so taken must be for a public use.
PUBLIC UTILITY a company that, because of the nature of its business,
has characteristics of a natural monopoly. For instance, an electric
company will have a natural monopoly over the sale of electricity to
that area, since having a single supplier of electricity for any given area
is the most efficient method of producing and distributing electricity.
Because no free market or competition exists for the services or goods
sold by public utilities, they are subject to government regulation of the
price they may charge and the means in which they may distribute their
goods.
PUBLIC UTILITY HOLDING COMPANY ACT OF 1935 see
Securities Act [PUBLIC UTILITY HOLDING COMPANY ACT OF 1935].
PUBLISH to make known to the general public. In the law of torts, a
statement does not constitute defamation unless it is published, that is,
made known to some third party other than the party making the
statement or the party defamed. In the law of wills, a will is not valid
unless the testator publishes it, by informing the witness that he or she
is signing the document as his or her will. In civil practice, service of
process may be effected by publication, usually in a local newspaper,
when notice of a lawsuit cannot be given by any other means.
PUFFING a statement of belief not meant as fact; a seller’s extravagant
statements, made to enhance his or her wares and induce others to enter
into a bargain. Salesmanship talk, characterized as puffing, cannot be
the basis of a charge of fraud or express warranty, since the buyer is
said to have no right to rely on sales talk.
EXAMPLE: Jean Claude puffs his cooking utensils by stating that they are
the best quality utensils money can buy or the easiest to clean or the
least expensive compared to other brands. A purchaser of these utensils
then finds a nearly identical set that costs a few dollars less. Jean
Claude’s comments cannot be taken as facts and do not give rise to a
cause of action against Jean Claude by the customer for misleading
advertising or the like.
PUNISHMENT sanctions imposed on a person because that person has
been found to have committed some act. Historically, punishment for
various acts has included fines, prison sentences, loss of rights or
privileges, banishment or deportation, physical dismemberment, and
execution. Some forms of punishment, such as banishment and
dismemberment, have fallen into disuse. The Constitution specifically
forbids cruel and unusual punishment. This prohibition has been held
to apply to torture or other treatment beyond the limits of civilized
standards. However, courts have generally had difficulty in defining the
exactness of the constitutional limitation. See capital punishment;
corporal punishment.
PUNITIVE DAMAGES see damages [EXEMPLARY DAMAGES].
PUR AUTRE VIE see per autre vie.
PURCHASE the acquisition of property by furnishing valuable
consideration. Compare descent and distribution; succession.
PURCHASE-MONEY SECURITY INTEREST see security interest.
PURCHASER one who acquires property by giving valuable consideration
for it. See bona fide purchaser.
PURCHASER IN DUE COURSE see holder in due course.
PURCHASE, WORDS OF see words of purchase.
PURE CONGLOMERATE MERGER see merger [PURE
CONGLOMERATE MERGER].
PURE PLEA see plea [PURE PLEA].
PURE RACE ACTS [STATUTES] see recording acts [PURE RACE].
PURLOIN to steal; to commit larceny.
PURPOSELY deliberately or intentionally. As used in criminal statutes to
define murder, purposely means intentionally, and as an act of the will,
not accidentally. In the Model Penal Code it is one of the four defined
mental states, along with knowingly, recklessly, and negligently. A
person acts purposely with respect to a material element of an offense
when it is his or her conscious object to engage in conduct or cause a
result. See mens rea.
PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS one of the “unalienable rights” of people
enumerated in the Declaration of Independence, along with “life” and
“liberty.” The right of persons to pursue any lawful business or
vocation, in any manner not inconsistent with the equal rights of others,
which may increase their prosperity or develop their faculties, so as to
give them their highest enjoyment. Because the right is not set forth in
the Constitution, it is not enforceable by the courts. However, the right
to the pursuit of happiness is often raised in arguments against
government regulations, because its mention in the Declaration of
Independence gives it a degree of forcefulness.
PURVIEW the enacting part of a statute distinguished from other parts,
such as the preamble. Conduct is WITHIN THE PURVIEW of a statute
when such conduct properly comes within the statute’s purpose,
operation or effect.
EXAMPLE: The legislature passes a statute prohibiting the possession of
burglar’s tools. Workmen such as locksmiths or window repairmen
commonly have these tools as part of their trade. Their possession of the
tools would not come within the purview of the statute.
PUTATIVE alleged; supposed. Thus, a putative marriage is one that is
actually void, but that has been contracted in good faith by the two
parties, or by one of the parties. The putative father in a paternity suit
is the person alleged to have fathered the child whose parentage is at
issue in the suit.
PUT OPTION see stock option [PUT OPTION].
PYRAMIDING the use of paper profits from an investment to finance
purchases of additional investments. Compare margin.
Q
Q AND A question and answer.
QDRO see Qualified Domestic Relations Order.
QSBS qualified small business stock. See capital [CAPITAL GAINS OR
LOSSES].
QUAERE (kwe@’-re@) Lat.: a query.
QUALIFIED DISCLAIMER see disclaimer [QUALIFIED DISCLAIMER].
QUALIFIED DOMESTIC RELATIONS ORDER [QDRO] any
judgment, decree, or order that grants to a person the right to
participate in another’s pension. The person who is granted a specific
participation in the other person’s pension must be a spouse, a former
spouse, or a dependent child. This person is called an ALTERNATE PAYEE
and the original sole owner of the pension being divided is called a
PARTICIPANT. The pension itself is referred to as a PLAN. A QDRO is an
exception to the antialienation provision of the federal law governing
pensions, known as ERISA.
QUALIFIED PENSION OR PROFIT-SHARING PLAN see retirement
plans [QUALIFIED PENSION OR PROFIT-SHARING PLAN].
QUALIFIED SMALL BUSINESS STOCK see capital [CAPITAL GAINS
OR LOSSES].
QUANTUM MERUIT (kwän’-tu@m me*’-ru@-ĭt) Lat.: as much as he
deserved. l. Historically, it was a common count in the action of
assumpsit, allowing recovery for services performed for another on the
basis of a contract implied in law or an implied promise to pay the
performer for what the services were reasonably worth.
2. It refers today to a theory under which a plaintiff may recover for
reasonable value of services or materials furnished to another who has
enjoyed those materials or services under circumstances that reasonably
notified him or her that the plaintiff expected to be paid. The doctrine
imposes liability for a contract implied by law, which arises not from
the consent of the parties but from the law of natural justice and equity,
and which is based on the doctrine of unjust enrichment. See quasi
[QUASI CONTRACT] Compare officious intermeddler.
EXAMPLE: A physician renders emergency services to an unconscious
accident victim. Consent to those services by the injured party is
implied in law, so that the physician may bring an action in quantum
meruit to recover the reasonable value of the services.
QUANTUM VALEBANT (kwän’-tu@m va*l-e@’-ba*nt) Lat.: as much as they
were worth. A common law action of assumpsit for goods sold and
delivered, founded on an implied assumpsit or promise by the defendant
to pay the plaintiff as much as the goods are reasonably worth.
QUARE CLAUSUM FREGIT (kwä’-ra@ klauW’-zu@m fra@’-gĭt) Lat.:
wherefore he broke the close. An early form of trespass designed to
obtain damages for an unlawful entry upon another’s land. The form of
action was called trespass quare clausum fregit, or trespass qu. cl. fr.
BREAKING A CLOSE was the technical common law expression for
unlawful entry upon land. Even without an actual fence the complainant
would plead that the “defendant with force and arms broke and entered
the close of the plaintiff,” since in the eyes of the common law every
unauthorized entry upon the soil of another was a trespass.
QUASH to annul, overthrow or vacate by judicial decision.
QUASI (kwa@’-zi; kwä’-ze@) Lat.: as it were, so to speak; about, almost, like.
QUASI CONTRACT one that, unlike a true contract, is not based on the
apparent intention of the parties to undertake the performances in
question, but is an obligation created by law for reasons of justice and
fairness. The doctrine of quasi contract is based upon the principle that a
party must pay for a benefit he or she desired and received under
circumstances that render it inequitable for him or her to retain it
without making compensation. See quantum meruit; unjust
enrichment.
EXAMPLE: A car owner brings his car in for brake repairs. The mechanic
fixes the brakes and in doing so he also fixes a separate part of the axle
that has a direct relationship to the car’s ability to brake correctly.
Although the axle repair was not specifically contracted for, a quasi
contract is implied for which the owner must pay the mechanic.
QUASI CORPORATION see corporation [QUASI CORPORATION].
QUASI CRIMINAL describes a proceeding that, though not actually a
criminal prosecution, is sufficiently similar in terms of the substantial
sanction (civil fine, loss of employment, loss of license, suspension
from school, etc.) or the stigma attached to warrant some of the special
procedural safeguards of a criminal proceeding. See also due process.
QUASI IN REM describes proceedings that are not purely in rem but that
are brought against the defendant personally, although the real object is
to deal with particular property; refers to actions for money damages
begun by attachment, garnishment or other seizure of property, where
the court has no jurisdiction over the defendant but has jurisdiction
over a thing belonging to the defendant or over a person who is indebted
or under a duty to the defendant.
QUEEN’S BENCH see King’s [Queen’s] Bench.
QUERY question; indicates that the proposition or rule it introduces is
unsettled or open to some question.
QUESTION, LEADING see leading question.
QUESTION OF FACT disputed factual contention that is traditionally left
for the jury to decide, unless the judge is serving as TRIER OF FACT (see
fact finder) in the case.
EXAMPLE: The jury is asked to decide if Butch developed a product while
he was employed by his company or after he was fired. That issue is a
question of fact, and the legal significance of the answer (who is entitled
to what) is for the judge to determine.
Compare question of law.
QUESTION OF LAW disputed legal contentions that are traditionally left
for the judge to decide. The occurrence or nonoccurrence of an event is
a question of fact; its legal significance is a question of law.
EXAMPLE: Two parties stipulate [agree] on the facts of the situation in
which they are involved. The judge is then asked to only rule on the
question of law that those facts present.
QUESTION, POLITICAL see political question.
QUIA EMPTORES, STATUTE OF (quῑ’-a* e*mp-to@’-re@z) Lat.: an act
passed by Parliament in 1290 that abolished the restraint upon
alienation or transfer of land that had been imposed under the feudal
system. The process of subinfeudation [creation of new manors by the
subject of a lord] was terminated, and after that date only the king was
able to infeudate. The statute’s practical effect on land transactions and
ownership was that after the land was sold, the seller had no further
connection with it. Thus, subinfeudation was replaced by strict
alienation.
QUIA TIMET (quῑ’-a*tῑ’-me*t) Lat.: because he fears. A type of injunction
sought in a court of equity to restrain an anticipated (feared) damage.
Such a remedy would be granted only upon a showing of imminent and
irreparable harm.
QUICK alive, living.
QUICKENING the point at which a fetus first moves within the womb.
The term VITALIZED [alive] applies to the fetus both before and after
quickening.
QUID PRO QUO (kwĭd pro@kwo@) Lat.: something for something. In some
legal contexts, synonymous with consideration; sometimes referred to
as the quid and always indicating that which a party receives or is
promised in return for something he or she promises, gives or does.
QUIET ENJOYMENT the right to unimpaired use and enjoyment of
property. For leased premises, a guarantee of quiet enjoyment is
usually expressed by a COVENANT OF QUIET ENJOYMENT in a written
lease, but such a covenant may be implied today from the landlordtenant relationship, even where it is not so expressed. This covenant is
violated if the tenant’s enjoyment of the premises is substantially
disturbed either by wrongful acts or omissions of the landlord or by
persons claiming a superior title against the landlord.
EXAMPLE: A company agrees to lease a warehouse owned by a landlord.
When the company’s lease is to begin, the tenants who were in the
warehouse are still there. Their presence violates the company’s right to
quiet enjoyment. A few states may place the burden of removing the
tenants on the company, but most states place the burden on the
landlord. In that majority of states, if those tenants do not leave after a
certain amount of time, the company can rescind the lease without
penalty.
The covenant may be and often is included in a deed conveying title
to property. If it is present in a deed, the grantor is obligated to protect
the estate of his grantee against lawful claims of ownership by others.
See constructive eviction; covenant.
QUIET TITLE a suit in equity brought to obtain a final determination as
to the title of a specific piece of property. A quiet title action is
distinguished from an action to REMOVE CLOUD ON TITLE, which is
brought to determine and resolve problems of instruments conveying a
particular piece of land, rather than to resolve the actual claims to that
land.
EXAMPLE: Rahul believes he is the rightful owner of a parcel of land, but
there is a question concerning the transfer of the land 25 years ago. In
order to satisfy any doubts so that he may sell the property, Rahul brings
a quiet title action to confirm his ownership by judicial decree.
QUIETUS final discharge from debt or obligation. Rest or death.
QUI TAM (quῑ täm) Lat.: who as well. A qui tam action is a lawsuit under
a statute, which gives to the plaintiff bringing the action a part of the
penalty recovered and the balance to the state. The plaintiff describes
himself as suing for the state as well as for himself.
QUITCLAIM DEED a deed that conveys only that right, title or interest
that the grantor has, or may have, and that does not warrant that the
grantor actually has any particular title or interest in the property. The
grantor under a quitclaim deed represents merely that whatever interest
he may have he conveys to the grantee.
QUORUM the number of members of any body who must necessarily be
present in order to transact the business of that body.
QUOTATION 1. in commercial usage, a statement of the price of an item;
2. the price stated in response to an inquiry.
QUOTIENT VERDICT see verdict [QUOTIENT VERDICT].
QUO WARRANTO (kwo@wär’-rän-to@) Lat.: by what right or authority. An
ancient common law writ that was issued out of chancery on behalf of
the king against one who claimed or usurped any office, franchise or
liberty, to inquire by what authority he asserted such a right, in order
that the legitimacy of the assertion might be determined. Formerly a
criminal method of prosecution, it has long since lost its criminal
character and is now a civil proceeding, expressly recognized by
statute, and usually employed for trying the title to a corporate
franchise or to a corporation or public office.
Quo warranto proceedings may be brought against corporations
where the company has abused or failed for a long time to exercise its
franchise. In the case of an official, it may be brought to cause him or
her to forfeit an office for misconduct. If in these cases a quo warranto
proceeding determines that a company no longer properly holds a
franchise or that an officer no longer properly holds his or her office, it
will oust the wrongdoer from enjoying the franchise or office. The
purpose of the writ is not to prevent an improper exercise of power
lawfully possessed; its purpose is to prevent an official, corporation or
persons acting as such from usurping a power that they do not have.
QURAN see Koran.
R
R. registered. See trademark.
RACE a term commonly used in antidiscrimination statutes that refers to
ancestry, as opposed to national origin. For use in a property law
context, see recording acts.
RACE-NOTICE see recording acts [RACE-NOTICE].
RACIAL PROFILING see profiling [RACIAL PROFILING].
RACKETEER INFLUENCED AND CORRUPT ORGANIZATIONS
ACT [RICO] see racketeering.
RACKETEERING originally, an organized conspiracy to commit
extortion. Today, punishable offenses created by Congress aimed at
eradicating organized crime by providing for enhanced sanctions and
new remedies to be used in dealing with the illegal activities of persons
involved in organized crime.
RADAR an electrical device used for determining the speed, direction, or
range of an object. The term stands for Radio Detection and Ranging.
Radar was developed during World War II and since the late 1940s has
been used by police to monitor the speed of motor vehicles. Radar is
generally admissible in court as probative evidence that a person was
driving in excess of the speed limit. However, the accuracy of a
particular radar reading may be attacked on the grounds of the
inadequacy of the training of the police officer operating the unit,
whether the unit has been recently tested for accuracy or is properly
calibrated, and whether it was operated properly on a given occasion.
Furthermore, the type of radar device used may affect whether the
evidence produced by it is admissible.
RAISED CHECK a check whose face amount has been increased from the
amount for which the check was originally issued. That change
constitutes a material alteration under the Uniform Commercial
Code and discharges any party whose contract is thereby changed
unless that party assents or is precluded from asserting the defense. A
holder in due course of the raised check may enforce it for its original
amount.
RAKE-OFF skim profits; bribe.
RANSOM 1. money or other consideration paid for the release of a
kidnapped or otherwise captured person or thing; 2. to redeem from
captivity by payment.
RAPE intercourse by force or threat, or under circumstances where the
victim is unable to resist due to intoxication or lack of consciousness.
State statutes general refer to “SEXUAL ASSAULT” or “SEXUAL ABUSE”
instead of the term “rape.” Where “rape” is used in common parlance, it
refers to sexual penetration. Both sexual assault and sexual abuse refer
to engaging in sexual acts, or forcing or encouraging another person to
engage in sexual acts alone or with another person of any age, whether
of the same sex or of the opposite sex. Sexual assault or sexual abuse
statutes criminalize offenses involving penetration as well as other
sexual offenses, including SEXUAL CONTACT (the touching of another’s
intimate body parts without their consent) and non-touching offenses
such as lewdness or indecent exposure of one’s genitals, as well as
exposing a child to sexually explicit magazines or videos. State statutes
vary greatly with regard to the criminal punishments available for
various sexual offenses.
Types of behavior that include verbal comments of a sexual nature,
that are unwelcome or reasonably could be expected to be unwelcome,
generally fall under the heading of “sexual harassment.” Examples of
sexual harassment include sexually suggestive or obscene comments,
gestures, or jokes; requests for sexual favors; unwelcome inquiries or
comments about a person’s sex life; or unwelcome sexual flirtations or
advances. State statutes generally provide only civil remedies for the
victims of sexual harassment. See harassment [SEXUAL HARASSMENT].
DATE RAPE a situation where initially the victim willingly accompanied
the attacker on a social outing but then a sexual assault occurred.
STATUTORY RAPE sexual intercourse with a person under the age of
consent. See carnal knowledge.
RAPE CRISIS COUNSELOR PRIVILEGE privilege against disclosure
of records and notes afforded by some states to professionals who give
victims of sexual assault counseling and emotional support. The
privilege is usually available in both civil and criminal proceedings. The
privilege is relatively novel and is presently recognized in only a small
number of jurisdictions. Where it has been adopted, its availability
represents a judgment that the confidentiality of a rape victim and a rape
crisis counselor is sufficiently important to justify limiting the right of
the criminal defendant to confront the witnesses against him or her
under the Sixth Amendment.
RAPE SHIELD LAWS see shield laws.
RAPINE forcible taking of property.
RAP SHEET see criminal record.
RASURE erasure or alteration to a document.
RATABLE proportional, capable of estimation; taxable. Thus, a ratable
estate is a taxable estate. In bankruptcy, a ratable distribution is a pro
rata share of the bankrupt’s assets. Ratable does not mean equal, but
rather pro rata according to some measure fixing proportions.
RATE a stated or fixed price for some commodity or service measured by a
specific unit or standard or that may be stated as a percentage of a fixed
figure, such as a percentage of profits; an amount of charge or payment
with reference to some basis of calculation.
RATE OF RETURN a return on investment, frequently used to describe
the rate that a utility, such as an electric company or telephone
company, is entitled to earn on its investment, and is determined by
combining the capital structure of the utility with the proper cost of
capital. It is expressed as a percentage of the utility’s rate base.
RATE OF TAX see tax rate.
RATIFICATION to sanction or affirm confirmation of the act of another
regardless of whether the act was originally authorized. The process by
which society approves a fundamental change in the law. Congress may,
by a two-thirds vote, propose a constitutional amendment or call for a
convention to propose amendments to the Constitution. Any proposed
amendment must then be ratified either by the legislature or by
conventions in three-fourths of the states before they become effective.
RATIOCINATION the process of reasoned, rational, exact thought.
RATIO DECEDENDI (rä’-she@-o@da@-sa@-de*n’-de@) Lat.: the reason for the
decision; the principle that the case establishes.
RATIO LEGIS (rä’-she@-o@la@’-gĭs) Lat.: legal reasoning or grounds; the
underlying principle; theory, doctrine or science of the law.
EXAMPLE: A loitering statute permits law enforcement officers to
disperse crowds of people rather than arrest each person and go through
a series of formalities not actually necessary in the circumstances. The
ratio legis of the statute is to allow the officers more latitude in
attempting to prevent crime rather than to rely solely on apprehension
and sentencing as a deterrent.
RATIONAL BASIS TEST a method of constitutional analysis under the
equal protection clause used to determine whether a challenged law
bears a reasonable relationship to the attainment of some legitimate
governmental objective. See fundamental right.
RAVISH generally, synonymous with rape. Literally, to ravish is to seize
or snatch by force. Traditionally, a valid indictment for rape required
the use of the term ravished, which implied force or violence; it would
thus constitute an essential word in all indictments for rape, importing
not only violence on the part of one party but resistance on the part of
the other.
RAVISHMENT see sexual assault.
RE see in re.
READY WILLING AND ABLE to be prepared to act, and capable of
acting, in a given situation, such as the buyer or seller in a real estate
transaction.
REAL CHATTEL see chattel [REAL CHATTEL].
REAL ESTATE every possible interest in land, except for a mere chattel
interest.
REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST [REIT] a specialized
investment organization that functions as a financial intermediary in the
real estate debt market and that qualifies under Internal Revenue Code
requirements to act as a conduit with respect to income distributions.
The Massachusetts Trust is a popular legal form for REITs. Trusts fall
into two basic categories: equity trusts, which invest in income
properties under terms that provide equity ownership and/or
participation in income, and mortgage trusts that lend funds on a shortterm basis for development and construction and on a long-term basis
for first and second mortgages.
REAL EVIDENCE an object relevant to facts in issue at a trial and
produced for inspection at trial rather than described by a witness. Real
evidence may include any object produced for inspection at a trial, from
the murder weapon to a tape recording of a telephone conversation or a
photograph of where an event occurred to the exhibition of a physical
injury. Real evidence is one type of demonstrative evidence.
REALIZATION 1. the conversion of an asset into money; 2. in tax law, the
occurrence of a transaction deemed to be a sufficiently substantial
economic change for the taxpayer to warrant imposition of INCOME TAX
(see tax). If the tax is imposed, the event gives rise to recognition.
GAIN OR LOSS REALIZED the difference between the amount realized on a
sale or exchange of an asset and the taxpayer’s basis in such asset.
EXAMPLE: A taxpayer buys stock for $5 a share. Ten years later, he sells
the stock for $15. The taxpayer has a realization of $10 on each share
and must pay tax on the total gain. If the stock is sold at $1, he has a
loss of $4 a share, and his income is reduced by that amount before his
tax liability is calculated.
REAL PARTY IN INTEREST the person who will be entitled to the
benefits of the legal action if it is successful; one who is actually and
substantially interested in the subject matter, as opposed to one who has
only a nominal, formal or technical interest in it. For example, if an
insurance company pays its insured for damage done to his automobile
under a collision insurance provision of his policy and if the insurance
company attempts to collect its loss from the responsible party, the suit
may be brought in the name of the insured, but the real party in interest
will be the insurance company.
REAL PROPERTY 1. land and whatever is erected or growing on it, or
affixed to it; 2. rights issuing out of, annexed to, and exercisable within
or about, the land. See fixture. Compare chattel.
REAL TIME TRANSCRIPT see court reporters [REAL TIME].
REALTOR real estate broker. Compare relator.
REALTY an interest in land; another word for real property.
REAPPORTIONMENT changing of a legislative district or of the number
of seats a state is entitled to in the Congress to more clearly reflect the
population of that district or state; an attempt to meet the right of every
person to vote on a one-person, one-vote basis. Compare gerrymander.
EXAMPLE: Each legislative district elects one person to represent them in
Congress, but one district has only 10,000 people whereas another
district covers 20,000 people. Reapportionment will attempt to make
each district equal in size.
REARGUMENT the oral presentation of additional arguments to a court
after it has already heard argument, for the purpose of demonstrating
that there is some decision or principle of law that would have a
controlling effect and that has been overlooked, or that there has been a
misapprehension of facts. Reargument usually occurs prior to the court
rendering a decision in a matter and may be distinguished from a
rehearing that also presents some new or overlooked principle of law
or fact but that usually occurs after the court has rendered its decision.
REASONABLE a subjective standard for what is fair, just, or appropriate;
that which is ordinary or usual under the circumstances. Rational and
logical. Compare unreasonable.
REASONABLE BELIEF 1. in criminal law, similar to the probable cause
standard in that it is a subjective standard used to validate a warrantless
search and seizure or arrest and that considers whether an officer
acted on personal knowledge of facts and circumstances that are
reasonably trustworthy, and that would justify a person of average
caution to believe that a crime has been or is being committed; 2. in
insurance law, a subjective standard used to determine the extent to
which an automobile insurance policy covers a driver, based on the
reasonableness of the driver’s belief that the owner’s permission had
been granted to use the vehicle, whether or not such permission was
directly granted.
REASONABLE CARE that degree of care that under the circumstances
would ordinarily or usually be exercised by or might be reasonably
expected from an ordinary prudent person. The exercise or absence of
reasonable care, which is a jury question, is often dispositive of tort
cases or of cases involving injury to others. See care [REASONABLE
CARE]; reasonable man [person].
REASONABLE DILIGENCE see diligence.
REASONABLE DOUBT refers to the degree of certainty required of a
juror before he or she can make a legally valid determination of the
guilt of a criminal defendant. These words are used in instructions to
the jury in a criminal trial to indicate that innocence is to be presumed
unless the jury can see no reasonable doubt of the guilt of the person
charged. The term does not require that proof be so clear that no
possibility of error exists; it means that the evidence must be so
conclusive that all reasonable doubts are removed from the mind of the
ordinary person. See also moral certainty; preponderance of the
evidence.
EXAMPLE: Jay is charged with first degree murder, which requires that he
intentionally planned the death. At his trial, he attempts to show that the
killing occurred on the spur of the moment in a fit of rage. He is trying
to create in the jurors a reasonable doubt that he planned the murder. If
he is successful in that effort, he may lower the degree of his guilt to
manslaughter.
REASONABLE MAN [PERSON] a phrase used to denote a hypothetical
person who exercises qualities of attention, knowledge, intelligence and
judgment that society requires of its members for the protection of their
own interest and the interests of others. Thus, the test of negligence is
based on either a failure to do something that a reasonable person,
guided by considerations that ordinarily regulate conduct, would do, or
on the doing of something that a reasonable and prudent person would
not do.
REASONABLE TIME a subjective standard based on the facts and
circumstances within a particular case, with applicability in a variety of
contexts. Within commercial law, the term applies to the amount of time
in which to accept an offer, to inspect goods prior to payment or
acceptance, to await performance by a party who repudiates a contract,
or the time in which a seller may substitute conforming goods for goods
rejected by a buyer as nonconforming. If not governed by statute, the
term may also refer to the time allowed to set aside a default judgment,
to inform an insurance company of an accident, to file certain claims,
and to make various motions. Compare time is of the essence.
REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION see presumption.
REBUTTAL generally, the time either party is given to refute or oppose a
claim or claims made by the opposing party that would not otherwise
belong in that party’s case in chief. Also refers to the time given to the
party who presented the first closing argument to rebut any claims made
by the opposing party in the closing argument, which followed. This
rebuttal can only attack those claims made in the opposing party’s
argument and cannot raise any new issues.
REBUTTAL EVIDENCE any evidence that refutes, counteracts or
explains away evidence given by a witness or an adverse party. Rebuttal
evidence is offered to contradict other evidence or to rebut a
presumption of fact.
REBUTTER a form of common law pleading that was a de-fendant’s
answer of fact to the plaintiff’s response to the defendant’s rejoinder.
RECALL a method of removing a public official from office by submitting
to popular vote the issue of whether the official should continue in
office. In insurance law, the invalidation of an insurance policy before it
becomes effective. Under the federal Consumer Safety Act, a recall is
the process by which a manufacturer is required to replace or repair
potentially defective products in order to bring them into conformity
with consumer product safety rules.
RECALL A JUDGMENT reverse or vacate a decision based on a matter
of fact, as opposed to a matter of law.
RECAPITALIZATION a recasting of the capital structure of a
corporation. A typical capitalization will contain bonds (called
funded debt), preferred stock and common stock. Voluntary
recapitalization could involve exchanging an existing bond issue or
exchanging a preferred stock issue for bonds.
EXAMPLE: A corporation finds that the amount of its outstanding loans to
banks is greater than the corporation wants. The directors recapitalize
the corporation by exchanging shares of the corporation’s stock for
money to repay the loans. The corporation thus receives additional
equity investors in return for reduction of its debt.
Recapitalizations are common when public companies emerge from
bankruptcy. See refinancing.
RECAPTURE a term generally applied when an event or transaction
requires a taxpayer to repay earlier tax savings by payment of
additional tax in the present taxable year. Thus, upon a sale or
exchange of property that constitutes a CAPITAL ASSET (see capital), the
gain realized on such sale or exchange constitutes capital gain.
However, under certain circumstances, if the taxpayer has taken excess
depreciation (ACCELERATION DEPRECIATION over STRAIGHT LINE
DEPRECIATION) with respect to real property or any depreciation with
respect to personal property, to the extent of such depreciation the gain
realized on the sale or exchange of that property is taxed as ORDINARY
INCOME (see income) and not as capital gains. This taxation of the
proceeds of the sale or exchange or the capital asset as ordinary income
is recapture.
RECEIVABLES see account [ACCOUNT RECEIVABLE]; balance sheet.
RECEIVER 1. a neutral person appointed by the court to receive and
preserve the property that is the subject of litigation during the period
of litigation, or to manage and dispose of the property as the court or
officer may direct. The court takes possession of the property in
controversy through its agent, the receiver, during the litigation or after
the decree or judgment, for the benefit of the people entitled to the
property, when the court does not deem it proper that either party have
control of it during that time. Although the assets involved in the
litigation are in custody of the receiver, title to the assets remains in the
owners who are parties to the litigation, and the receiver manages the
property for the benefit of the parties.
A receiver is frequently appointed in insolvency proceedings to
manage the property of the insolvent for the benefit of his creditor.
2. In criminal law, one who obtains possession of property that he or
she knows or believes to have been stolen is a receiver of stolen
property and commits an offense thereby.
RECEIVERSHIP 1. an equitable remedy whereby property is by order of
the court placed under the control of a receiver so that it may be
preserved for the benefit of affected parties. A failing company may be
placed in receivership in an action brought by its creditors. The
business is often continued but is subject to the receiver’s control. A
receivership is ancillary to or in aid of the main relief sought in an
action; it is sometimes used to carry out an order or decree but is
generally used for the purpose of preserving property during litigation
involving rights in the property; 2. the status of property affected by this
remedy; property is said to be in receivership.
EXAMPLE: The Antique Furniture Company is heavily indebted to several
creditors and is only showing average sales. In a court-approved
agreement between the owners of the company and the creditors,
Antique is placed in receivership. The court appoints a receiver to
oversee Antique’s expenditures and orders. At the same time, the
creditors settle for a partial payment of the debt and dismiss the rest of
the debts against Antique.
Compare bankruptcy.
RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY a crime at common law, and under
most modern statutes, requiring as its elements, that property be stolen
by someone other than the person charged with receiving it; that the
person receiving it has actually received the property or aided in
concealing it; that the person has knowledge that the property has been
stolen; and, in some jurisdictions, that the person received it with
wrongful intent. The receiver is popularly known as a fence, and his or
her blameworthiness is sometimes considered greater than the thief’s
since the fence has induced the thief to commit the crime. The crime
may be a felony or misdemeanor, or its degree may vary, depending on
the value of the property received. See fence.
RECESS 1. temporary adjournment of a trial or hearing after
commencement of the trial or hearing. The recess may be short, for
lunch, overnight or for a few days. If it amounts to a substantial delay in
the proceedings, it is called a continuance; 2. the intermission between
sittings of the same legislative body at its regular or adjourned session,
but not the interval between the final adjournment of one body and the
convening of another at the next regular session. Compare sine die.
RECIDIVIST a second offender or habitual criminal, who is often subject
to extended terms of imprisonment under habitual offender statutes.
See criminal; sentence [EXTENDED TERM].
RECIPROCAL NEGATIVE EASEMENT see easement [RECIPROCAL
NEGATIVE EASEMENT].
RECIPROCITY generally, a relationship between persons, corporations,
states, or countries whereby privileges granted by one are returned by
the other. Compare comity.
RECISSION see rescission.
RECKLESS careless, inattentive to duty; foolishly heedless of danger;
rashly adventurous; indifferent to consequences; mindless; very
negligent.
In criminal law, the term connotes conscious disregard of a
substantial and unjustifiable risk, a gross deviation from the standard of
care that a reasonable person would observe in the actor’s situation, a
wanton indifference to the consequences of one’s acts. Compare
negligence.
RECKLESS DISREGARD refers to conduct without concern for
consequences or danger. Compare negligence.
EXAMPLE: Fully aware that his conduct creates a risk of harm, Louis
lights a pack of firecrackers and throws them into a crowd. Regardless
of whether anyone is hurt, Louis has acted with reckless disregard.
RECKLESS NEGLIGENCE see negligence [WANTON NEGLIGENCE].
RECOGNITION imposition of tax under the federal income tax system.
Income or loss that the taxpayer has realized is recognized when it is
subject to tax.
NONRECOGNITION OF GAIN gain or loss from the sale or exchange of an
asset is not recognized when such gain or loss is not subject to tax. For
example, if a taxpayer sells his or her principal residence, and within a
period ending two years after the date of the sale of such principal
residence, the taxpayer reinvests the proceeds from the sale, the gain
realized (the excess of the selling price over the basis of the property) is
not recognized.
RECOGNITION OF GAIN gain or loss realized from the sale or exchange of
property is recognized when such gain or loss is subject to tax. In
general, whenever an asset is disposed of, the gain realized is taxed
unless specifically exempted from recognition.
RECOGNIZANCE an obligation of record, entered into before a court or
other officer duly authorized for that purpose, with a condition to do
some act required by law, upon failure of which the recognizor is
obligated to pay a specific sum to the court or a party. For instance, in
criminal law, a recognizance is an undertaking entered into before a
court of record by the defendant and his or her sureties by which they
bind themselves to pay a sum of money to the court unless the
defendant appears for trial. See bond; release on own recognizance
[R.O.R.].
RECOGNIZANCE, ONE’S OWN see release on recognizance [R.O.R.].
RECORD 1. to preserve in writing, printing, on film, tape, etc.; 2. a precise
history of a suit from beginning to end, including the conclusions of law
thereon, drawn by the proper officer to perpetuate the exact facts.
EXAMPLE: A court rule provides that a judge must inform a person
convicted of a crime of his or her right to an attorney to pursue an
appeal if he or she so desires. Since all comments by the judge are
transcribed, a record is produced that will eliminate any question
whether the person was informed of his or her rights.
The RECORD ON APPEAL consists of those items introduced in
evidence in the lower court, as well as a compilation of pleadings,
motions, briefs and other papers filed in the proceeding in the inferior
court. 3. in real property law, to enter in writing in a repository
maintained as a public record any mortgage, sale of land or other
interest affecting real property located within the jurisdiction of the
government entity maintaining the public record. See criminal record;
of record; recording acts.
RECOMBINANT DNA TECHNOLOGY see DNA testing
[RECOMBINANT DNA TECHNOLOGY].
RECORD DATE the date on which a shareholder must be registered on
the books of a corporation in order to receive dividends and other
distributions or to vote on company business. See ex-dividend.
RECORDING ACTS in real property law, statutes that afford a means of
giving CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE (see notice) to others of ownership
respecting estates or interests in land, by providing for recording the
existence of that estate or interest. These statutes generally provide for
recording deeds, mortgages, EXECUTORY CONTRACTS (see executory)
of sale and leases of specified duration. When one’s interest or
ownership in land is recorded, the recording prevents a subsequent
purchaser or mortgagee of the land from qualifying as a bona fide
purchaser for value without notice, because the instrument recorded
would provide at least constructive notice of another’s prior ownership
or interest in the land.
Under a RACE type of recording act, the first person who records
takes in preference to other persons who receive an interest from the
same source, even if the first recorder had notice of a prior unrecorded
conveyance. A RACE-NOTICE type of act operates like the race statute,
but only if the first recorder had no notice of the prior unrecorded
conveyance. NOTICE type recording acts provide that a bona fide
purchaser is favored even though a prior purchaser is the first to record,
so long as the second purchaser had no knowledge of the prior
conveyance at the time he made his purchase.
Where there is a GRACE PERIOD provided by a recording act, a prior
conveyee is protected against a subsequent conveyee even if he or she
doesn’t record first, as long as he or she records within the period of
grace defined by the recording act. See chain of title.
RECORD OWNER the owner of real estate or other property, such as
stocks, bonds, etc., at the time in question as revealed by public
records. The term is frequently found in tax statutes, and therefore has
importance in terms of which party is liable for a certain tax. It also may
permit a party to have notice of certain events, such as land foreclosure.
RECOUPMENT 1. the right of defendant to have plaintiff’s award of
damages against defendant reduced; 2. a right of deduction from the
amount of the plaintiff’s claim by reason of either a payment thereon or
some loss sustained by the defendant because of the plaintiff’s wrongful
or defective performance of the contract out of which his or her claim
arose; 3. a withholding, for an equitable reason, of something that is
due. The word is nearly synonymous with discount, deduction or
reduction. Compare counterclaim; cross-claim.
RECOURSE the act of satisfying a claim, i.e., “recourse in the courts.” If
persons fail to obtain a desired result in court, they might claim that
they will seek “recourse in the legislature.” In financing, the ability to
pursue a judgment for a default on a note not only against the property
underlying the note, but against the party or parties signing the note. In
nonrecourse financing, only the property used as collateral for the
underlying loan may be reached to satisfy a default judgment. See
without recourse.
RECOVERY 1. the establishment of a right by the judgment of a court,
though recovery does not necessarily imply a return to whole or normal;
2. the amount of the judgment; 3. the amount actually collected pursuant
to the judgment.
RECOVERY OF BASIS see basis [RECOVERY OF BASIS].
RECUSAL disqualification of a judge, jury or administrative officer for
prejudice or interest in the subject matter. A judge may be recused as a
result of objection by either party, or may voluntarily disqualify himself
or herself if he or she fears that he or she may not act impartially, or that
some circumstance will lead to a suspicion of bias.
EXAMPLE: Zhang Wei has been before a judge several times on criminal
charges and has been acquitted each time. After each trial, the judge
makes certain disparaging comments indicating to the press that he
believes Zhang Wei is guilty. When Zhang Wei comes before the judge
again, Zhang Wei seeks a recusal based on the earlier comments. Zhang
Wei contends that the comments indicate prejudice on the judge’s part
and will prevent his getting a fair trial.
In most states, a judge may also be disqualified because he is related
within certain degrees to a party litigant.
RECUSATION the process of disqualification of a judge, jury, or
administrative hearing officer by reason of prejudice, bias, or interest in
the subject matter. Judges may be recused by the objections of either
party or they may voluntarily disqualify themselves if they fear they
may not act in an impartial manner. Under most state statutes, judges
may also be disqualified because they are closely related to a party
litigant. The appearance of impropriety must be avoided at all costs.
REDEEMABLE BOND a bond that is callable for payment by the issuer.
REDEMPTION a regaining of possession by payment of a stipulated
price; especially, the process of annulling a defeasible title, such as is
created by a mortgage or tax sale, by paying the debt or fulfilling other
obligations.
For tax purposes, a redemption is any purchase by a corporation of
its own stock.
RIGHT OF REDEMPTION statutory right in some jurisdictions to redeem
property that has been forfeited because the mortgagor had defaulted
on the mortgage payments. It can be exercised only after the
foreclosure and sale of the property, by paying the amount due on the
mortgage, plus interest. It is a personal privilege and not an interest or
estate in land, and it can be exercised only by the persons and on the
condition named in the statute that grants the right. This right arises
only after the equity of redemption period ends. It frequently applies to
foreclosure under tax foreclosure statutes.
RED HERRING an issue, whether legal or factual, raised in a case or law
school exam that may be important generally but that has no relevant
importance to the question at hand. Also, a preliminary prospectus,
concerning a future stock issue, distributed during the WAITING PERIOD
—the period from the filing date to the effective date of a registration
statement.
RE-DIRECT EXAMINATION see cross-examination [RE-DIRECT
EXAMINATION].
REDLINING an unlawful credit discrimination based on the
characteristics of the neighborhood surrounding a would-be borrower’s
dwelling.
REDRESS relief or remedy. It may be damages or equitable relief. See
recovery; restitution.
REDUCTIO AD ABSURDUM (ra@-du*k’-te@-o@ äd äb-sûr’-du*m) Lat.: to
reduce to the absurd. To disprove a legal argument by showing that it
ultimately leads to an absurd position.
REENTRY the resumption of possession pursuant to a right reserved when
the former possession was surrendered. It was a remedy given by the
feudal law for nonpayment of rent, and also refers to a right reserved in
the conveyance of a fee that is subject to a CONDITION SUBSEQUENT (see
condition). See conditional fee. Compare ejectment; quiet title.
REFEREE a quasi-judicial officer appointed by a court for a specific
purpose, to whom the court refers power and duty to take testimony,
determine issues of fact and report the findings for the court to use as a
basis for judgment.
REFERENDUM referring of legislative acts to the voters for final
approval or rejection.
REFINANCING refunding existing elements of the capital structure;
usually implies selling a new bond issue to provide funds for
redemption of a maturing issue. See recapitalization.
REFORM to correct, modify, or rectify; synonymous with amend.
REFORMATION an equitable remedy consisting of a revision of a
contract by the court, in cases where the written terms of the contract
do not express what was actually agreed upon. Thus, reformation is
generally only decreed upon a clear and convincing showing of
MUTUAL MISTAKE (see mistake); if only one party was mistaken,
reformation is not appropriate unless the mistake of one party resulted
from the other party’s fraud.
EXAMPLE: Two parties negotiate a contract that inadvertently calls for a
delivery date that predates the signing of the contract. Neither party
realizes this mistake at the time, but, subsequently, one of the parties
tries to use this fault as a reason for cancelling the contract. Since a
delivery date can never come before a contract is completed, the court
reforms the contract and does not permit the one party to cancel.
REFUND see claim for refund; tax [TAX REFUND].
REFUNDING the process of selling a new issue of securities to obtain
funds needed to retire existing securities. Debt refunding is done to
extend maturity and/or to reduce debt service cost. See refinancing.
REFUSAL the rejection of something to which a person is entitled, such as
the rejection of goods under a contract; the denial of an obligation to
perform a legal duty such as the refusal to complete a contract.
A refusal may be an affirmative act, or it may be the mere failure or
neglect to perform an act that one is obligated to do without a demand
therefore, such as the payment of money.
REG. abbreviation for registered; regulation.
REGIONAL STOCK EXCHANGE a domestic exchange located outside
New York City. See stock exchange.
REGISTER to record formally and exactly; to enroll; to enter precisely in
a list or the like. For corporations, to record the names of stock and
bond holders on the books of the company. The REGISTRAR may be an
agent, such as a bank, or it may be the corporation. The registrar is
responsible for preventing unauthorized issuance of stock by a
company. See draft.
REGISTERED BOND see bond [REGISTERED BOND].
REGISTERED [COUPON] BOND see bond.
REGISTERED REPRESENTATIVE a commission sales person who is
qualified to take orders for securities from the general public. A
securities sales trainee must be trained in the securities trade for at least
six months and must pass tests prepared by the National Association of
Securities Dealers [NASD] and the New York Stock Exchange; when
training and testing are successfully completed, the trainee is registered
with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the NASD, New York
Stock Exchange and regional exchanges, and is registered in the various
states in which the sales person intends to do business.
REGISTRAR a record keeper, such as the official at a university who is
responsible for maintaining academic records. In corporate law, an
agent appointed by a corporation to record the names of stock-and
bondholders. See register.
REGISTRATION the act of making a list, catalogue, schedule, or register
which has the purpose and effect of giving notice and preventing fraud
and deception; within the meaning of election laws, a method of proof
for ascertaining and identifying electors who are eligible to vote. In
securities law, registration is the process by which a company submits
financial data to the Securities and Exchange Commission so that it
may have its securities bought and sold on public markets.
REGISTRATION OF OFFENDERS statute requiring lifetime
registration of convicted sex offenders (including those found not
guilty by reason of insanity) with law enforcement, and allowing law
enforcement to notify the community of the sex offender’s known
address and vehicle. Failure to register is punishable as a criminal
action. Federally, and in many states, such a statute is called MEGAN’S
LAW. The provision of COMMUNITY NOTIFICATION is intended to prevent
tragedies such as the sexual assault and murder of a seven-year-old girl
(Megan) at the hands of her next-door neighbor, a twice-convicted sex
offender whose past status was not known by the community.
REGISTRATION STATEMENT a document that must be approved by
the Securities and Exchange Commission [SEC] before a company
makes a public offering of new securities through the mails or in
interstate commerce. The registration statement must describe the
securities and must disclose in detailed information on the nature of the
business, including accounting statements, the identity of the
management and key stockholders, the purpose of the offering, and the
use to be made of the proceeds.
REGISTRY (OF DEEDS) an officially maintained book that provides a
place and mechanism for registering evidences of conveyances of
interests in real property, so that notice may be available to all third
parties that there has been a change in the ownership of property
effected by a conveyance of that property.
REGULAR COURSE OF BUSINESS see ordinary course of business.
REGULATION A the “small-issues” exemptions governing the sale of
securities that are exempt from registration filing requirements.
REGULATION D see private offering [placement] [REGULATION D].
REGULATIONS rules or other directives issued by administrative
agencies to implement laws. These agencies must have specific
authorization to issue directives and must usually adhere to prescribed
procedures and conditions. See Administrative Procedure Act [APA].
REGULATION T a regulation of the Securities and Exchange
Commission that governs the maximum amount of credit that
securities brokers and dealers may extend to customers for the initial
purchase of regulated securities.
REGULATION U a rule of the Securities and Exchange Commission
that governs the maximum amount of credit that banks may extend for
the purchase of regulated securities.
REGULATION Z the body of regulations promulgated by the Federal
Reserve Board pursuant to the federal Truth in Lending Act that
entrusts that administrative agency with supervision of compliance by
all banks in the Federal Reserve System with the cost of credit
disclosure requirements established under the Act.
REGULATORY AGENCY a government body responsible for control
and supervision of a particular activity or area of public interest. For
example, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), in addition
to its other duties, administers the laws regulating access to
communication facilities such as television and radio airwaves.
Regulatory agencies are also called ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES.
EXAMPLE: The Environmental Protection Agency was created by
Congress to protect the quality of the nation’s air, water and land.
Pursuant to that goal, the agency monitors air pollution in cities, sewage
treatment plants, chemical landfills, etc. The Federal Trade Commission
regulates commercial practices and takes action against deceptive
advertising and monopolistic activity. There are many federal and state
regulatory agencies that enforce federal and state policies in particular
areas of governmental regulation.
REGULATORY OFFENSE a deed that is not inherently evil but is a
crime only because prohibited by legislation, i.e., malum prohibitum.
Regulatory offenses are also called STATUTORY OFFENSES and may
impose strict liability upon defendants for their violation.
REHABILITATION restoration of good repute; reformation. The term has
many specific connotations. In the context of a witness it means
restoring a witness’ credibility after cross-examination has successfully
impeached it. In bankruptcy it means the reorganization of a business
or an arrangement with creditors that will restore solvency to the
corporation. In matrimonial actions, the term REHABILITATIVE
ALIMONY refers to temporary spousal support necessary to train a
divorced person in useful skills so he or she will become employed and
self-supporting and not be dependent upon society for financial
survival. In criminal contexts, the term refers to efforts to become drugor alcohol-free, to perform community service, to obtain educational or
vocational training, or to otherwise demonstrate that the circumstances
that were underlying the criminal behavior are not likely to recur and
the person having bettered his or her situation can now be a productive
member of society. Judges and parole boards look at rehabilitative
efforts in sentencing and paroling criminals. See mitigating
circumstances.
REHEARING a retrial, a new hearing and a new consideration of the case
by the court (or other body) in which the suit was originally heard, and
upon the pleadings and depositions already in the case.
REHEARING EN BANC see en banc.
REINSTATE restore to a former state, authority, station, or status from
which one has been removed; as applied to insurance, to restore all
benefits accruing under a policy. As applied to employment practices, if
the former position no longer exists or is occupied by another with
senior service, an obligation to reinstate may be satisfied by placing the
person on a preferential employment list rather than by restoring the
person to active employment.
REIT see real estate investment trust [REIT].
REJOINDER in pleadings, in common law, an answer to plaintiff’s
replication by some matter of fact, in an action at law.
RELATION BACK the principle that an act done at a later time is deemed
by law to have occurred at a prior time, often for purposes of the statute
of limitations or rules of procedure permitting amendment of
pleadings.
RELATIVE refers to relationships by blood (consanguinity), marriage
(affinity), or adoption.
RELATOR the real party in interest in whose behalf certain suits are
brought by the state or the Attorney General when the right to sue
resides solely in that official; the real party in interest in an ex rel. suit;
also a person in whose behalf certain writs are issued, such as
informations in the nature of quo warranto. Thus, a habeas corpus
action is styled “United States ex rel. [defendant] vs. [warden].”
RELEASE a written document or the act of writing by which some claim,
right or interest is given up to the person against whom the claim, right
or interest could have been enforced.
In the law of property, the holder of a fee simple may convey to
another a term of years and then subsequently release his or her
reversionary interest [LEASE AND RELEASE] to the possessor of the term
of years.
RELEASE ON RECOGNIZANCE [R.O.R.] a method by which an
individual is released in lieu of providing bail, upon his or her promise
to appear and answer a criminal charge. The R.O.R. procedure permits
release on nonmonetary conditions, generally involving only the
promise to appear, but sometimes involving special conditions (e.g.,
remaining in the custody of another, abiding by travel restrictions).
RELEVANCY [RELEVANT] a test concerning the admissibility of
evidence. Evidence is relevant if it has a logical tendency, however
slight, to prove a fact in issue.
RELEVANT MARKET a term used by the courts in determining whether
a violation of an antitrust statute has occurred. Identification of the
relevant market of a product takes into account not only the product but
also its geographic area of distribution. Compare monopoly.
RELIANCE dependence, confidence, repose of mind upon what is deemed
sufficient authority.
DETRIMENTAL RELIANCE reliance by one party on the acts,
representations, or promises of another, which causes the first party to
allow or to effect a worsening change in his position.
RELICTION gradual and imperceptible withdrawal of water from land
that it covers, by lowering of the water’s level from any cause. If the
retreat of the waters is permanent, not merely seasonal, the owner of the
contiguous property acquires ownership of the dry land thus created.
Compare avulsion; dereliction.
RELIEF the redress or assistance awarded to a complainant, by the court,
especially a court of equity, including such remedies as specific
performance, injunction, rescission of a contract, etc.
EXAMPLE: Carlos ordered 200 items at a set price from a company that
happens to be the only manufacturer of the item. Although his order has
been produced, the company refuses to deliver unless Carlos pays a
price increase. Carlos seeks relief from a court, which in this instance
should be to order delivery since the item cannot be purchased
elsewhere.
The term generally does not comprehend an award of money
damages. Thus the term AFFIRMATIVE RELIEF is often used to indicate
that the gist of relief is protection from future harm rather than
compensation for past injury.
RELIEF TO LITIGANTS see contempt of court.
RELIGIOUS FREEDOM RESTORATION ACT federal law (held
unconstitutional as applied to states) preventing laws that substantially
burden the personal free exercise of religion. The purpose is to prevent
the federal government from substantially burdening religious exercise
without compelling justification. Often applied to Native American
religious claims as well as claims arising from religious exception to
contraceptive requirements under the Affordable Care Act.
RELINQUISHMENT see abandonment; abstention (doctrine).
REM see in rem.
REMAINDER that part of an estate in land that is left upon the
termination of the immediately preceding estate (often a life estate or
estate for a term of years) and that does not amount to a reversion to the
original grantor or his or her heirs. The remainder must be created by
the same conveyance and at the same time, as the preceding estate; the
remainder must vest in right during the continuance of the preceding
estate; and no remainder can be created in connection with a fee simple.
CONTINGENT [EXECUTORY] REMAINDER any remainder subject to a
CONDITION PRECEDENT (see condition), created in favor of an unborn
person, or in favor of an existing but unascertained person. Such an
interest was not, according to the older common law definition, an
estate, but the possibility of an estate. A contingent remainder becomes
a vested remainder only if any condition precedent is fulfilled and the
remainderman is identified prior to the termination of the preceding
estate.
EXECUTED REMAINDER a remainder interest that is vested as of the
present time, though the enjoyment of it may be withheld until a future
date.
VESTED REMAINDER a remainder created in favor of an existing and
ascertained person who has the right to immediate possession at the
termination of the preceding estate, or estates, subject only to another
person’s prior right to possession.
EXAMPLE: A grandfather conveys a house to his son for life, then to his
oldest grandson. The grandson has a vested remainder in the house
since he is entitled to it at the son’s death. If the grandson predeceases
the son, the house is distributed according to the provisions of the
grandson’s will.
REMAINDERMAN one who has an interest in the estate that becomes
possessory in futuro, after the termination, by whatever reason, of a
present possessory interest. Remainderman usually refers to one who
holds an interest in a remainder whether vested or contingent.
REMAND to send back, as for further deliberation; to send back to the
tribunal (or body) from which the matter was appealed or moved. When
a judgment is reversed, the appellate court usually remands the matter
for a new trial to be carried out consistent with the principles announced
by the appellate court in its opinion ordering the remand.
REMEDY the means employed to enforce or redress an injury. The most
common remedy at law consists of money damages.
EXTRAJUDICIAL REMEDY see extrajudicial [EXTRAJUDICIAL REMEDY].
EXTRAORDINARY REMEDY a remedy not usually available in an action at
law or in equity, and ordinarily not employed unless the evidence
clearly indicates that such a remedy is necessary to preserve the rights
of the party. Examples include the appointment of a receiver, a decree
of specific performance, the issuing of a writ of mandamus or writ of
prohibition or of an injunction.
PROVISIONAL REMEDY one provided pursuant to a proceeding incidental
to and in connection with a regular action, invoked while the primary
action is pending, to assure that the claimant’s rights will be preserved
or that he or she will not suffer irreparable injury. Its connection to the
primary action is termed collateral. Examples include attachment,
temporary restraining orders, preliminary injunctions, appointment of
receivers.
REMEDY, MUTUALITY OF see mutuality of remedy.
REMITTER the act by which a person, who has a good title to land, and
enters upon the land with less than his or her original title, is restored to
his or her original good title; the doctrine whereby the law will relate
back from a defective title to an earlier valid title.
REMITTITUR (re@-mĭ’-tĭ-tu@r) Lat.: reduction. The procedural process by
which the verdict of a jury is diminished; describes any reduction made
by the court, without the consent of the jury, to decrease an excessive
verdict.
EXAMPLE: A jury awards several million dollars to a small electronics
corporation as compensation for anticompetitive practices by a
multinational company. The judge is unsure whether the evidence
supports a finding against the large company but is not willing to
overturn the jury’s decision on that issue. Still, he feels that the award is
much too great and by remittitur reduces the award to one million
dollars. If the reduction is not accepted by the plaintiff, the judge will
set the entire verdict aside and order a new trial.
REMOTE CAUSE see cause [REMOTE CAUSE].
REMOVAL 1. a change in place or position, as the removal of a
proceeding to another court, especially from state to federal court; 2.
the process by which a public official is stripped of office for cause.
REMOVE CLOUD ON TITLE see quiet title [REMOVE CLOUD ON TITLE].
RENDER to officially announce a decision, either orally in open court or
by memorandum filed with the clerk.
RENDITION the covert transportation for interrogation of a foreigner
suspected of crimes, such as terrorism, to another country known to
have harsher and less stringently regulated methods of interrogation.
RENEWAL continuation in force and effect of a previously existing
arrangement for a new period, as a lease or a note, on the same or
different terms. Insurance policies are renewed from term to term.
RENOUNCE an affirmative declaration of abandonment; giving up of a
title or claim. See renunciation.
RENT a profit in money, goods, or labor issuing periodically out of land
and tenements, constituting a return for the privilege of use.
RENUNCIATION in criminal law, the voluntary and complete
abandonment of criminal purpose prior to the commission of a crime, or
an act otherwise preventing its commission. In some jurisdictions it is
an affirmative defense (see defense) to inchoate, or incipient, offenses
such as attempts, conspiracy, solicitation or offenses dependent upon
the conduct of another (i.e., accessorial crimes).
EXAMPLE: Vladimir devises an intricate plan to rob a bank, but, on the
evening on which he plans to carry it out, he finds that workmen are
redecorating the bank’s interior. He postpones the robbery until he can
formulate a new plan. He has not renunciated the crime since he plans
to rob the bank at another opportunity, even if that opportunity never
arises or the new plan is not carried out. If he has a genuine change of
heart and voluntarily destroys the blueprint of the bank, this might
satisfy the requirements of renunciation.
Compare withdrawal.
RENVOI (rähn’-vwä) Fr.: rule in some jurisdictions that in a suit by a
nonresident upon a cause arising locally, his or her capacity to sue will
be determined by looking to the law of his or her domicile rather than to
the local law. The problem of renvoi is nothing more than the question
whether the whole law including its conflict of laws of a foreign state is
looked to for solution when a reference is made to the law of another
state. If the reference is to the whole law, as is often the case, an
application of the renvoi concept is involved. Take, for example, the
case of a citizen of the United States permanently residing in France
who dies leaving movables in New York. Assuming the New York
conflict of laws rule to be that the law of the decedent’s domicile will
govern this matter, the New York forum would look to the “law” of
France. If the forum should look to the law applicable to a French
person dying in France leaving movables there, the court would be
rejecting the use of renvoi. If, however, the forum looks to the whole
law, i.e., including the French conflicts rule, this is using the renvoi.
REORGANIZATION the transaction by which the stock of property of
one corporation is exchanged for the stock or property of another
corporation. The shareholders of the old corporation generally hold the
same proportion of stock in the new corporation. The term is most often
used to mean reorganization under Chapter X of the Federal Bankruptcy
Act. See bankruptcy.
In corporate income tax law, a group of transactions including
mergers, consolidations, recapitalizations, acquisitions of the stock or
assets of another corporation, and changes in form or place of
organization. The common element in each of these transactions is that
if various technical requirements are met, the corporations or
shareholders involved may not recognize any gain for income tax
purposes, and the transation will occur tax free.
REPAIR see tenantable repair.
REPEAL abrogation or annulling of a previous law by the enactment of a
subsequent statute, which either expressly declares that the former law
shall be revoked, or contains provisions so irreconcilable with those of
the earlier law as to abrogate the earlier law by necessary implication.
Compare amend.
REPEAT OFFENDER see criminal [HABITUAL OFFENDER]; three strikes.
REPLEVIN a legal form of action ordinarily employed only to recover
possession of specific personal property unlawfully withheld from the
plaintiff, plus damages for its detention. In this primarily possessory
action, the issues ordinarily are limited to the plaintiff’s title to the
goods.
EXAMPLE: Arthi leaves a shipment of goods in a warehouse and prepays
storage costs for three months. At the end of that time, she goes to pick
up the goods, but the warehouse refuses to release them until she pays
for the storage. Arthi sues for replevin to obtain the goods.
REPLEVY to secure, especially by an action in replevin, redelivery of
goods that have been kept from the rightful owner.
REPLICATION the plaintiff’s answer or reply to the defendant’s plea or
answer. See pleadings.
REPLY a defensive pleading by one who has made a complaint; the sole
purpose of reply is to interpose a defense to new matter pleaded in the
answer. In modern practice a reply is an extraordinary pleading and is
not permitted except to respond to a counterclaim or by leave of court
to an answer or third-party answer.
EXAMPLE: A store owner sues Annika for failure to pay a debt. Annika
files a counterclaim against the store owner claiming that the washer
and dryer Annika purchased, which gave rise to the debt, have never
worked properly. The store owner can reply to the counterclaim that he
is not responsible for the problem or that Annika has not operated the
machines correctly.
REPORTERS see court reporters; reports.
REPORTS official published court or administrative agency decisions that
are collectively grouped by date and court of issuance into bound
volumes thus comprising the case law for that jurisdiction. The reports
(also known as reporters) have headnotes written by the publisher.
Some examples of reports are found in the Table of Abbreviations. The
United States Supreme Court has three reporters: United States Reports,
Supreme Court Reporter, and Lawyer’s Edition Supreme Court Reports.
REPOSE in civil actions, the maximum time period within which an
action may be brought, regardless of injury. While a statute of
limitations limits the remedy of going to court, a STATUTE OF REPOSE
limits the underlying cause of action. See also res judicata.
REPOSSESSION seizure or foreclosure. Either by judicial action or selfhelp, the secured creditor, to satisfy the debtor’s obligation, takes
possession of the property after the debtor defaults on his payments.
REPRESENT [REPRESENTATION] to stand in another’s place; to
speak with authority on behalf of another; to appear on one’s behalf. As
an element of actionable fraud, representation includes deeds or acts
calculated to mislead another, as well as words or positive assertions. In
insurance law, a representation is an oral or written statement preceding
the insurance policy and, though not part of it, is used to enable the
underwriter to form a judgment as to whether he or she will accept the
risk. Only a false misrepresentation that materially affects the risk will
permit the insurer to rescind the policy. In commercial law, a
representation is anything short of a warranty and is sufficient to create
a distinct impression of fact conducive to action.
In constitutional law, the Sixth Amendment’s right of assistance of
counsel in a criminal case includes the right to adequate and effective
representation. This standard includes the right to an attorney who
knows the relevant law, does not have any conflicts in the case at hand,
adheres to all legal procedural requirements so as not to forfeit any
rights, and vigorously pursues a client’s cast at trial through direct and
cross-examinations, the filing of motions, and the raising of objections.
Representation so lacking in competence creates a duty on a trial judge
to correct such to prevent a mockery of justice.
In property law, “representation” permits children or more remote
lineal descendants of a predeceased relative of the intestate to stand in
their predeceased ancestor’s shoes for purposes of inheritance.
Representation is equivalent to per stirpes (meaning by the stock or
roots). Compare per capita. See proportional representation; virtual
representation.
REPRESENTATIVE agent; one who acts for another in a special capacity.
One’s status as a representative entitles the person to a number of rights
including the right to discovery of trial preparation materials, and the
right to bargain collectively on behalf of employees. See personal
representative; registered representative.
REPRIEVE in criminal law, the postponement of a sentence for an
interval in which the execution is suspended. Compare commutation;
pardon. See also executive clemency.
REPUBLICATION an affirmative act of reviving a will after it has been
destroyed or otherwise replaced by a subsequent will, and is frequently
accomplished by use of a codicil. In those jurisdictions permitting
republication, the mere revocation of the subsequent will shall not
revive the earlier will without some type of affirmative act.
REPUDIATION refusal by one party to perform a contractual obligation to
another party. See anticipatory breach.
REPUTATION EVIDENCE see witness [CHARACTER WITNESS].
REQUIREMENTS CONTRACT see contract [REQUIREMENTS
CONTRACT].
RES (ra@s) Lat.: a thing. The subject matter of actions that are primarily in
rem, i.e., actions that establish rights in relation to an object, as opposed
to a person (in personam). For example, in an action that resolves a
conflict over title to real property, the land in question is the res.
Tangible personal property can also be a res, as in the corpus of a
trust.
EXAMPLE: A mother creates a trust for her children, providing that the
rentals from an office building be distributed to each child every month.
The office building is the trust res since it generates the income that is
distributed to the children.
In a QUASI IN REM (see quasi) proceeding, land or chattels that are
seized and attached at the beginning of the action, in order that they
may later be used to satisfy a personal claim, are the res of such suits.
The term refers as well to the status of individuals. Thus, in a divorce
suit, the marital status is the res. The purpose of a res is to establish a
court’s jurisdiction: if the property lies within the state where the
action is brought, or an individual in a divorce action is a domiciliary
of the state, then jurisdiction is established.
RES AJUDICATA see res judicata.
RESCIND to abrogate a contract, release the parties from further
obligations to each other and restore the parties to the STATUS QUO ante,
(see status quo) or the positions they would have occupied if the
contract had never been made. Compare rescission.
RESCISSION cancellation of a contract and the return of the parties to the
positions they would have occupied if the contract had not been made
(see status quo [STATUS QUO ANTE]). Grounds for rescission may
include original invalidity of the agreement, fraud, failure of
consideration, or material breach or default. Rescission may be
brought about by the mutual consent of the parties, by the conduct of
the parties or by a decree by a court of equity. See repudiation;
revocation. Compare rescind.
RESCRIPT a statement of the decision of the highest appellate tribunal; a
direction from that tribunal to a lower court to enter a decree in
accordance with that direction, in effect remanding the case to the lower
court for the entry of a decree.
RESCUE the act of aiding a person in imminent and serious peril, which,
as a matter of law, cannot give rise to a charge of contributory
negligence against the rescuer in risking his or her own life or serious
injury in attempting to effect the rescue, provided the attempt is not
made recklessly or rashly.
RESCUE DOCTRINE tort rule that holds a tortfeasor liable to his or her
victim’s rescuer, should the latter injure himself or herself during a
reasonable rescue attempt. The premise is that the wrong is not only to
the imperiled victim, but also to the rescuer. See Good Samaritan.
RESERVATION 1. a clause in any instrument of conveyance, such as a
deed, that creates a lesser estate, or some right, interest or profit in the
estate granted, to be retained by the grantor; 2. a tract of land, usually
substantial, set aside for specific purposes such as military grounds,
parks, Indian lands. Compare reversion; under protest.
RESERVE funds kept available to meet future contingencies. Examples
include funds banks must keep on hand to meet depositors’
withdrawals, insurance company liabilities, and pension payments. The
funds that must be presently retained are usually a percentage of the
institution’s full liability for the particular need. See accumulation
depreciation; depreciation reserve.
RESERVE CLAUSE clause generally found in sports contracts, giving a
team that first signs a player a continuing and exclusive right to that
player’s services, even beyond the length of the contract, and to the
point of obligating other teams to respect and enforce those rights. Such
clauses have less effect than they once did, and players in most sports
are free to move to other teams after their contract expires.
RESERVE DECISION see reservation [RESERVE DECISION].
RESERVED POINT see point reserved.
RESERVED POWERS see Tenth Amendment.
RES GESTAE (ra@s ge*s!-tí) Lat.: the thing done. Spontaneous exclamations
or statements so closely connected to an occurrence they are considered
part of that occurrence. Declarations that are subject to the hearsay rule
may be admissible if they qualify as res gestae; i.e., if they constitute a
part of the thing done under a recognized exception to the hearsay rule.
RESIDENCE broadly, any place of abode that is more than temporary. See
retreat, duty to; search and seizure; self-defense. Compare domicile.
RESIDENT ALIEN see alien.
RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY TREATMENT CENTERS see halfway
houses.
RESIDUARY BEQUEST see bequest [RESIDUARY BEQUEST]; residuary
legacy.
RESIDUARY CLAUSE clause in a will that conveys to the beneficiary of
a residuary legacy (residuary legatee) everything in a testator’s estate
not devised to a specific legatee; a testamentary clause that includes in
its gift any property or interest in the will that, for any reason,
eventually falls into the general residue, because specific legacies were
void, the disposition was illegal, or because for any other reason it was
impossible that the legacy should take effect; and it includes such
legacies as may lapse by events subsequent to the making of the will. It
operates to transfer to the residuary legatee such portion of his or her
property as the testator has not perfectly disposed of.
EXAMPLE: In his will Manny leaves his antique car to a cousin who
predeceases him. He also provides a residuary clause that leaves any of
his property not already disposed of in the will to his oldest son. In
addition to receiving all of Manny’s property not left to others, the son,
as the residuary legatee, also receives the antique car.
RESIDUARY ESTATE that part of a testator’s estate that remains
undisposed of after all of the estate has been discharged through the
satisfaction of all claims and specific legacies with the exception of the
dispositions authorized by the residuary clause.
RESIDUARY LEGACY a general legacy into which all the assets of the
estate fall after satisfaction of other legacies, payment of all debts of the
estate and all costs of administration.
RESIDUUM the substance or part remaining after some other part has been
taken away.
RESIDUUM RULE in administrative law, the principle that a decision
rendered by an administrative agency and based in part on incompetent
evidence will be upheld on judicial review if it is supported by a
residuum of competent evidence. The federal courts have rejected the
residuum rule.
RES IPSA LOQUITUR (ra@s ĭp’-saW lo@’-kwĭ-tûr) Lat.: the thing speaks for
itself. Refers to a rule of evidence whereby negligence of the alleged
wrongdoer may be inferred from the mere fact that the accident
happened, provided (1) that in the absence of negligence the accident
would not have occurred and (2) the thing that caused the injury is
shown to have been under the exclusive control of the alleged
wrongdoer. The procedural effect of successful invocation of the
doctrine is to shift the burden of going forward with the evidence,
normally borne by the plaintiff, to the defendant, who is thereby
charged with introducing evidence to refute the presumption of
negligence that has been created.
EXAMPLE: An accident occurs when the brakes of a new car fail on its
first trip from the dealer. The victim claims negligence on the part of the
car manufacturer and points to the failed brakes as evidence. Under the
doctrine of res ipsa loquitur, the manufacturer must now provide
evidence to show that some cause other than its negligence is
responsible for the accident.
RESISTANCE see utmost resistance.
RESISTING ARREST common-law offense involving physical efforts to
oppose a lawful arrest.
RES JUDICATA (ra@s ju*-dĭ-kä’-taW) Lat.: a thing decided; a matter
adjudged. The phrase reflects a rule by which a final judgment by a
court of competent jurisdiction is conclusive upon the parties in any
subsequent litigation involving the same cause of action. See bar;
merger.
EXAMPLE. Two parties litigate an issue in one federal district court, and
the defendant loses. Under the principle of res judicata, the defendant
could not then go to another federal district court and litigate the same
issue a second time.
Compare collateral [COLLATERAL ESTOPPEL].
RESPITE 1. a delay, postponement or forbearance of a sentence, not
comprehending a permanent suspension of execution of the judgment;
2. a delay in repayment, granted to a debtor by his creditor. See grace
period; reprieve.
RESPONDEAT SUPERIOR (ra@-spôn’-da@-ät su@-pe*r’-e@-ôr) Lat.: let the
superior reply. This doctrine is invoked when there is a master-servant
relationship between two parties. The premise is that when an employer
(master) is acting through the facility of an employee or agent (servant),
and tort liability is incurred during the course of this agency because of
some fault of the agent, then the employer or master must accept the
responsibility. Implicit is the common law notion that everyone must
conduct his or her affairs without injuring another, whether or not he or
she employs agents or servants. See scope of employment. Compare
vicarious liability.
EXAMPLE: A truck driver employed by a manufacturing company causes
an accident while delivering a shipment to a buyer. The doctrine of
respondeat superior allows the victims to sue the company for any
injuries caused by the driver. Under normal principles of tort
responsibility, the driver can also be sued. Since it is unlikely that he has
the money to pay a damage award, the doctrine acts to assure that the
victims will be paid the full amount of the award because the company
by law will be required to carry adequate insurance or have sufficient
assets for such contingencies. Absent this doctrine, companies would be
able to hire judgment-proof drivers and in that fashion avoid all liability
for injuries caused by such drivers.
RESPONDENT 1. in equity, the party who answers a pleading. 2. the
party against whom an appeal is prosecuted.
RESPONSIBILITY the obligation to answer for an act and to repair any
injury caused by that act; the state of being answerable for an
obligation. As used in statutes such as those governing awards of local
public contracts to RESPONSIBLE BIDDERS, the term refers to the
characteristic the absence of which would cause fair-minded and
reasonable persons to believe it was not in the best interest of the
municipality to award the contract to the lowest bidder, and may involve
experience, financial ability and adequate facilities.
RESPONSIBILITY, DIMINISHED see diminished capacity.
RESPONSIVE PLEADING see pleadings [RESPONSIVE PLEADINGS].
RESTATEMENT an attempt by the American Law Institute [A.L.I.] to
present an orderly statement of the general common law of the United
States, including not only the law developed by judicial decision, but
also the law that has evolved from the application of statutes by the
courts. Restatements are compiled according to subject matter:
contracts, torts, property, trusts, agency, conflict of laws,
judgments, restitution, security and foreign relations.
RESTITUTION act of making good or of giving the equivalent for loss,
damage or injury. As a remedy, restitution is available to prevent unjust
enrichment, to correct an erroneous payment and to permit an
aggrieved party to recover deposits advanced on a contract. As a
contract remedy, restitution is limited to the value of a performance
rendered by the injured party, and ordinarily requires that both parties to
a transaction be returned to the STATUS QUO (see status quo).
In criminal law, restitution is sometimes ordered as a condition of a
probationary sentence. Compare indemnity.
RESTRAINING ORDER an order granted without notice or hearing,
demanding the preservation of the status quo until a hearing can be
held to determine the propriety of injunctive relief, temporary or
permanent. A restraining order is always temporary, since it is granted
pending a hearing; thus it is often called a T.R.O., a temporary
restraining order.
EXAMPLE: A federal agency grants a lumber company permission to cut
wood on federal lands. An environmental group immediately goes to
court and seeks a restraining order prohibiting the cutting of any trees
until the validity of the grant is determined. The order probably will be
issued since irreparable damage will be caused by cutting the trees,
provided the group can produce a minimum of evidence that their
position as to the illegality of the grant is correct.
RESTRAINT, JUDICIAL see judicial restraint.
RESTRAINT OF TRADE in common law and as used in the antitrust
laws, illegal restraints interfering with free competition in commercial
transactions, which tend to restrict production, affect prices or otherwise
control the market to the detriment of consumers of goods and services.
RESTRAINT ON ALIENATION restriction on the ability to convey real
property interests, any attempt at which is in derogation of the
common law policy in favor of free alienability. Such restrictions often
are void or voidable as unlawful restraints on alienation.
RESTRAINT, PRIOR see prior restraint.
RESTRICTED SECURITIES securities acquired from an issuer in a
nonpublic transfer, that is, on terms and at a price not offered to the
general public through an underwriter. Since the securities were not
part of a public offering and thus not subject to the safeguards of the
Securities Act of 1933, such as the registration of the securities and the
issuing of a prospectus, their sale to the public is restricted. Under
S.E.C. rules, restricted stock must be held at least two years prior to its
sale on an established securities market, and may only be sold in small
amounts. Restricted stock is often referred to as LETTERED STOCK since
the certificate must bear a legend reciting the restrictions to which it is
subject. It is also known as INVESTMENT STOCK.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANT a promise as part of an agreement,
restricting the use of real property or the kind of buildings that may be
erected. The promise is usually expressed by the creation of a covenant,
reservation or exception in a deed. In order for a grantor to enforce the
covenant against remote grantees [subsequent owners who take title
from the first grantee], the covenant must run with the land.
EXAMPLE: When Marshall sells a plot of land next to his house, he
includes a restrictive covenant with the deed that no structure over two
and one-half stories will be constructed on the land. Since the covenant
is included with the deed, it is valid against any and all other purchasers
of the land.
RESTRICTIVE INDORSEMENT see indorsement [RESTRICTIVE
INDORSEMENT].
RESULTING TRUST see trust [RESULTING TRUST].
RESULTING USE see use [RESULTING USE].
RETAIL INSTALLMENT CONTRACT generally, a contract consisting
of a promissory note and a chattel mortgage; a contract whereby the
seller retains title to, or a security or property interest in, goods
purchased by a buyer who is obligated to make periodic payments for
the goods. In some states, the term also includes certain types of leases.
See installment contract.
RETAINER compensation paid in advance to an attorney for services to be
performed in a specific case. A retainer may be the whole sum to be
charged (plus expenses) but more often is a deposit, with the attorney
furnishing a periodic or final statement of how much the client owes for
services rendered.
RETALIATORY EVICTION see eviction [RETALIATORY EVICTION].
RETIRE 1. in reference to bills of exchange, to recover or redeem by
payment of a sum of money; to withdraw from circulation or from the
market.
2. A jury is retired when the judge has submitted the case for its
consideration and verdict.
RETIREMENT PLAN a plan provided by an employer or a self-employed
individual for an employee’s or self-employed individual’s retirement.
Because of the tax advantages, most retirement plans are designed to
insure a present deduction to the employer while the employee is
permitted to avoid recognizing the income until he or she has actually
or constructively received it.
DB(K) see db(k).
DEFERRED COMPENSATION a plan under whose terms an employee defers
payment of a portion of his or her salary in return for the employer’s
promise to pay the employee the salary at some time in the future.
Generally, if such plan is not financed by irrevocably setting the fund
aside for the employee or guaranteed by insurance, the employee will
not recognize income from such plan until he or she is actually paid,
and the employer does not obtain a deduction under such plan until the
employee recognizes the income.
401(K) named after a section in the U.S. Internal Revenue Code. A
401(k) is a type of employer-sponsored defined contribution retirement
plan. Employees select the portion of their wages to be directed to their
account. Some employers will match a portion of their employees’
contributions.
INDIVIDUAL RETIREMENT ACCOUNT [IRA] an account to which the
employee pays a specified tax-exempt sum, whose earned income is
also tax-exempt when specified limitations upon withdrawal are
adhered to.
INHERITED IRA individual retirement account(s) that are left to one or
more beneficiaries when the original IRA owner dies.
KEOGH PLAN a pension or profit-sharing plan set up by a self-employed
individual.
NON QUALIFIED PENSION OR PROFIT-SHARING PLAN a plan created by an
employer for an employee that does not qualify for a present deduction
to the employer and deferral of income recognition to the employee. In
such cases the employer is generally not permitted to take a deduction
for the amount set aside until the employee recognizes such amount as
income.
PENSION FUND [PLAN] any plan, fund, or program that provides
retirement income to employees or results in a deferral of income by
employees for periods extending to the termination of covered
employment or beyond. This definition is intended to reach a wide
variety of retirement benefit structures, including profit-sharing plans
that meet these requirements, with the only limitation being the express
language of the plan providing for retirement benefits or deferral of
income.
QUALIFIED PENSION OR PROFIT-SHARING PLAN a plan set up by an
employer for an employee or a group of employees that allows the
employer to pay into a trust a certain sum or percentage of
compensation for the employees. The employer obtains a present
deduction for the contributions but the employee does not recognize the
income until it is actually paid to him.
ROLLOVER a method whereby an employee converts from one qualified
plan to another without the recognition as income of the sum rolled
over.
ROTH 401 (K) a type of retirement plan that combines the features of a
Roth IRA and a traditional 401(k). Starting in 2006, businesses were
able to offer their employees the Roth IRA type of tax treatment for
their 401(k) contributions.
ROTH IRA this is a special variant of the traditional IRA which does not
provide a tax deduction for contributions but which under strict rules,
does allow the gains to be distributed, tax free and at ages beyond age
59½.
RETIREMENT SECURITY ACT see ERISA.
RETRACTION the withdrawing of a plea, declaration, accusation,
promise, etc.
RETRAXIT a voluntary renunciation by a plaintiff in open court of his or
her suit and cause of action and that bars a second action between the
same parties on the same grounds; it is dismissal with prejudice,
equivalent to a verdict and judgment on the merits of the case.
RETREAT, DUTY TO a duty found in some jurisdictions obligating a
person to retreat from a dangerous situation rather than employ selfdefense and injure another. However, one is not usually required to
retreat when attacked in one’s own home. In tort law, the failure to
exercise one’s duty to retreat may create liability in the party who could
have retreated. In criminal law, the failure to retreat except from one’s
home or from a robber will foreclose the defense of self-defense in a
minority of states.
RETRIAL a new trial in which an issue or issues already litigated, and as
to which a verdict or decision by the court has been rendered, are
reexamined by the same court for some sufficient reason, such as a
recognition that the initial trial was improper or unfair as a result of
procedural errors. Compare mistrial.
RETROACTIVE refers to a rule of law, whether legislative or judicial,
that relates to things decided in the past. “Retroactive” includes both
retrospective and ex post facto, the former technically applying only to
civil laws, the latter to criminal or penal laws. A RETROSPECTIVE LAW is
one that relates back to a previous transaction and gives it some
different legal effect from that which it had under the law when it
occurred. A retrospective law is constitutionally objectionable if it
impairs vested rights acquired under existing laws, or creates a new
obligation or attaches a new disability with respect to past transactions.
Similarly, an ex post facto law retroactively imposes criminal liability
on behavior that took place prior to enactment of the criminal statute.
State constitutions may prohibit their legislatures from enacting
retrospective laws; ex post facto laws are prohibited by the Constitution
of the United States.
Judicially created law (common law) is often retroactive in its effect,
since the court’s decision is made on the basis of old facts as to which
the litigants could not possibly have predicted at the time of their
actions the court’s eventual interpretation of the law; nevertheless they
are bound by it.
In constitutional law, decisions announcing new or different rights
favoring criminal defendants are often given full retroactive effect so as
to permit a COLLATERAL ATTACK (see collateral) on previously finalized
judgments.
EXAMPLE: The state supreme court rules that any person affected by the
use of a particular police procedure can exclude evidence so obtained.
The court also rules that this right is only available after the date of this
decision. The latter ruling means that the law is prospective only and
has no retroactive effect and that any person already tried cannot take
advantage of the new rule. If the decision had retroactive effect, every
person who has been convicted or whose trial is in progress and who
has not been permitted to challenge the legality of the evidence used
against him could now raise the issue.
Compare statute of limitations.
RETROSPECTIVE see retroactive.
RETURN 1. a report from an official, such as a sheriff, stating what he or
she has done in respect to a command from the court, or why he or she
has failed to do what was requested. See false return.
2. a report from an individual or corporation as to its earnings, etc.,
for tax or other governmental purposes.
RETURN, INCOME TAX a document by which a taxpayer or his
representative provides information to the Internal Revenue Service
relevant to the determination of the taxpayer’s tax liability for a
specified period.
AMENDED RETURN a return by which a taxpayer or his or her
representative corrects information contained in an earlier return. An
amended return may require an additional payment of tax (possibly with
interest and/or penalties) or be accompanied by a claim for refund.
DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX a return required of those taxpayers
who do not regularly withhold income, as in the case of self-employed
taxpayers, who expect that the total amount of their withholdings will
not cover their tax liability for the tax year, and whose filing is
accompanied by payments of estimated tax.
FALSE RETURN see false return.
FILING the process by which the taxpayer transmits the return to the
Service. The Internal Revenue Code sets forth the due dates for the
filing of the various returns and rules exist for determining whether or
not the returns are timely filed.
INFORMATION RETURN any of a number of returns that only
communicate information to the Service relevant to tax liability but that
do not compute the actual liability of any taxpayer or accompany the
actual payment of tax.
JOINT RETURN a return filed by a husband and wife, setting forth tax
information concerning each of them, and computing a joint tax
liability.
REVALUATION SURPLUS see unearned surplus [REVALUATION
SURPLUS].
REV. abbreviation for revenue, review, revised.
REV’D abbreviation for “reversed.”
REVENUE income from whatever source derived; that which returns or
comes back from an investment.
REVENUE BILLS bills that levy taxes. Federal revenue bills are required
to originate in the House of Representatives. Many states have similar
constitutional provisions requiring that such bills originate in a
particular house of a legislature, or that the bills shall not be passed in
the last five days of the legislative session.
REVENUE PROCEDURE see revenue ruling [REVENUE PROCEDURE].
REVENUE RULING a published decision by the Internal Revenue
Service in the Internal Revenue Bulletin applying the federal tax laws to
a particular set of facts. Revenue Rulings (as opposed to PRIVATE
RULINGS) may be relied upon by taxpayers in determining the tax
impact upon them of a similar set of facts.
PRIVATE RULING a determination by the Internal Revenue Service issued
to a taxpayer who has asked for a determination as to the tax impact
upon such taxpayer of a particular transaction. The determination is
binding with respect to that taxpayer only and may not be relied upon
by other taxpayers. These private rulings are published with the
identifying characteristics of the taxpayer and the transaction deleted.
REVENUE PROCEDURE a published determination by the Internal
Revenue Service concerning the administrative practices in the Internal
Revenue Service. For example, the method and requirements for
obtaining a private ruling are often published in revenue procedure.
REVERSAL as used in opinions, judgments and mandates, the vacating
or changing to the contrary the decision of a lower court or other body.
Compare affirm; overrule; remand.
REVERSE DISCRIMINATION a term referring to the practice of
excluding a classification or race of people who have not been
historically discriminated against, usually whites, from positions that
are made available exclusively to persons or groups that have
traditionally been the subject of discrimination, or who otherwise
benefit from affirmative action programs. The term has been applied to
the practice of reserving positions for minorities in school admissions
programs, corporate promotions, and rehiring of blacks with less job
seniority than whites. The contention that affirmative action violates the
equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and Title VI
of the Civil Rights Act, has been the cause of differing opinions by
members of the Supreme Court.
REVERSE MORTGAGE see mortgage [REVERSE MORTGAGE].
REVERSIBLE ERROR error substantially affecting appellant’s legal
rights and obligations that, if uncorrected, would result in a miscarriage
of justice and that justifies reversing a judgment in the inferior court;
synonymous with PREJUDICIAL ERROR. See error; plain error;
harmless error.
EXAMPLE: In his summation to the jury, a prosecutor makes disparaging
remarks concerning the defendant Jules’ failure to take the stand, thus
violating the defendant’s constitutional right to remain silent. The
defendant objects and the judge tells the jury to disregard the remarks.
The jury finds Jules guilty. On appeal, the appellate court finds the
prosecutor’s remarks so blatant that no amount of instructions by the
judge could eliminate the prejudice that was caused. The remarks
constitute reversible error, and Jules is granted a new trial.
REVERSION an interest created by operation of law by a conveyance of
less than an absolute interest in property, thus leaving in the grantor
some present or future right or interest in the property; a FUTURE ESTATE
(see estate) created by operation of law to take effect in possession in
favor of a lessor or a grantor or his or her heirs, or the heirs of a
testator, after the natural termination of a prior particular estate leased,
granted or devised. Compare remainder; reservation.
REVERTER see reversion. See also possibility of a reverter.
REVEST returning to the possession of the donor or the former
proprietor.
REV’G abbreviation for “reversing.”
REVIEW judicial reexamination of the proceedings of a court or other
body; a reconsideration by the same court or body of its former
decision; also, an appellate court’s examination of the record of a
lower court or agency’s determination that is on appeal to the appellate
court. See bill of review; judicial review.
REVISED STATUTES statutes that have been altered, reorganized or
reenacted. Their enactment is generally regarded as repealing and
replacing the former laws.
REVIVAL in the law of wills, the act reinstituting a former will (which had
been revoked by a latter will) once the latter will is canceled or
destroyed. A few jurisdictions recognize the former will automatically
upon the latter will’s cancellation; most require some affirmative act,
such as republication, before the former will is effective.
REVOCABLE able to be terminated at the maker’s discretion. See
revocation.
REVOCATION 1. recall of authority conferred; 2. cancellation of an
instrument previously made; 3. cancellation of an offer by the offeror,
which, if effective, terminates the offeree’s power of acceptance.
EXAMPLE: Steel Pipe Company offers to buy used pipe from a supplier at
15 cents a foot. Before the supplier responds, Steel realizes it has
offered to buy the wrong type of pipe and revokes its offer. Since the
supplier has not acted, the revocation is effective.
REVOCATION OF PAROLE [PROBATION] see probation
[REVOCATION OF PAROLE; REVOCATION OF PROBATION].
REVOCATION OF WILL an affirmative act, such as writing “annulled”
or “void” across the face of the will, or other marks on the words of the
instrument and not just on the margin; or by tearing off the signatures at
the end of the will, all of which operate to render the instrument invalid
for purposes of probate. Some courts require that the markings must
affect the entire will or there is not revocation, while others allow
particular names to be eliminated, although attempts to write in a new
name will not be effective unless independently signed and witnessed.
REVOKE 1. to recall a power previously conferred; 2. to vacate an
instrument previously made; 3. to annul, repeal, rescind or cancel
privileges, e.g., parole, probation, driver’s license.
EXAMPLE: Eric is involved in numerous accidents and moving violations
and accumulates enough points on his driving record for Massachusetts
to revoke his driving privileges.
REVOLVING CREDIT renewable credit line over a set period of time.
The term refers generally to credit extended by a banker or merchant for
a certain amount that can be paid off periodically.
REV. STAT. see revised statutes.
RFLP see DNA testing [RFLP].
RFRA see religious freedom restoration act.
RICO see Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act
[RICO].
RIDER 1. an amendment or addition attached to a document usually found
as an attachment to an insurance policy identifying changes or increases
in coverage; 2. in the legislative process, a provision in a bill that is not
germane to the main purpose of the law.
EXAMPLE: The president wants to increase the federal excise tax on
gasoline five cents to raise revenues needed to repair the nation’s roads
and bridges. Knowing that the president is anxious to approve the bill, a
senator attaches to it a rider providing for an unrelated measure he was
having difficulty getting support for by itself.
RIGGED ORDERS see manipulation [RIGGED ORDERS].
RIGHT see civil rights; claim of rights; constitutional right; inalienable
rights; inherent right; preemptive rights; rights; subscription
rights; vested [VESTED RIGHTS]; visitation rights; voting right;
Voting Rights Act.
RIGHTFUL HEIRS see heirs.
RIGHT OF ACTION see cause of action.
RIGHT OF ELECTION in probate law, the statutory right of a surviving
spouse to elect to take either what the deceased spouse gave under the
will, or a share of the deceased spouse’s estate as set forth by statute.
Compare dower.
RIGHT OF FIRST PUBLICATION see copyright [RIGHT OF FIRST
PUBLICATION].
RIGHT OF FIRST REFUSAL right of a purchaser to be given the
opportunity to purchase before any other buyer. If the purchaser
declines the offer, the seller may then offer the transaction to others.
Similar to a call option, see stock option [CALL OPTION], but ROFR
applies in various contexts, including real estate and real property
ventures.
RIGHT OF FIRST OFFER by contrast, a ROFO only means an agreement to
negotiate in good faith before negotiating with other potential
purchasers.
RIGHT OF PRIVACY see privacy, right of.
RIGHT OF REDEMPTION see redemption [RIGHT OF REDEEMPTION].
RIGHT OF REENTRY see reentry, right of.
RIGHT OF WAY 1. in property law, an easement to use another’s land for
passage; 2. in the context of vehicular traffic, the right of a vehicle or
pedestrian to proceed on the road, while others yield.
RIGHT OR WRONG TEST see insanity [M’NAGHTEN RULE].
RIGHTS 1. individual liberties in a constitutional sense; 2. proprietary,
contractual or legal rights. 3. in the context of securities trading, a
negotiable privilege to buy a new issue of stock at a subscription price
lower than the market price of outstanding stock. Compare stock
option; warrant. See civil rights; claim of rights; constitutional
right; inalienable rights; inherent right; preemptive rights; rights;
subscription rights; vested [VESTED RIGHTS]; visitation rights; voting
right; Voting Rights Act.
RIGHT TO CONVEY see covenant [COVENANT OF SEISIN AND RIGHT TO
CONVEY].
RIGHT TO COUNSEL Sixth Amendment guarantee that an accused
person shall have effective legal counsel for his or her defense to a
criminal charge. Indigent persons are entitled to have an attorney
appointed to represent them. See public defender.
RIGHT TO DIE see euthanasia [PASSIVE EUTHANASIA].
RIGHT TO REMAIN SILENT see Miranda rule.
RIGHT TO WORK LAWS see open shop.
RIGHT, WRIT OF see writ of right.
RIGOR MORTIS (rĭ-gôr môr’-tĭs) Lat.: stiffness of death. Medical
terminology depicting the rigidity of the muscles after death.
RIPARIAN RIGHTS rights that accrue to owners of land on the banks of
bodies of water, such as the use of such water, and ownership of soil
under the water. The lands to which these natural rights are attached are
called in law RIPARIAN LANDS.
RIPE FOR JUDGMENT the point in a case when everything seems to
have been done that ought to be done before entry of a final
adjudication upon the rights of the parties. See ripeness.
RIPENESS doctrine in constitutional law under which courts will not
decide cases in advance of the necessity of deciding them, i.e., in
advance of their being ripe for decision. Compare justiciable; moot
case.
RISK hazard, danger, peril, exposure to loss, injury, disadvantage or
destruction. In tort law, the risk that should be reasonably perceived and
avoided defines the common law duty concerning the probability or
foreseeability of injury to another. See assigned risk; obvious risk.
RISK ASSUMPTION see assumption of the risk.
RISK, AT see tax shelter [AT-RISK RULES].
RISK CAPITAL money invested in a business venture for which stock is
issued; in security law, a security transaction whereby an investor
subjects money to the risks of an enterprise over which he or she
exercises no managerial control. If a transaction is so characterized, it is
subject to the various securities laws.
RISK, FORESEEABLE see foreseeability [FORESEEABLE RISK].
RISK OF LOSS 1. a phrase used to signify who bears the financial risk of
damage or destruction when property is being transferred from a buyer
to a seller.
EXAMPLE: In a contract between Dynamic Boat Company and a buyer,
the buyer agrees to assume risk of loss only when the boat is in his or
her possession. Therefore, if anything should happen to the boat after its
completion but while it is being transported to the buyer, from the
buyer’s point of view Dynamic must take responsibility for the damage.
2. In insurance law, the term refers to the contingencies or unknown
events that are contemplated by the insured and that are covered by the
insurance.
RISK OF NONPERSUASION see burden of proof.
ROBBERY forcible stealing; the felonious taking of property from the
person of another by violence or by putting him in fear.
ARMED ROBBERY robbery aggravated by the fact that it is committed by
a defendant armed with a dangerous weapon, whether or not the weapon
is used in the course of committing the crime. Compare burglary.
ROBERT’S RULES OF ORDER see parliamentary law.
ROBINSON-PATMAN ACT section 2(a) of the Clayton Act, the
Robinson-Patman Act, also known as the ROBINSON-PATMAN ANTIDISCRIMINATION ACT, prohibits price discrimination between purchasers
of commodities of like grade and quality, where the effect of the
discrimination may be to substantially lessen competition or tend to
create a monopoly in any line of commerce. The illegal discrimination
may include payment or acceptance of commisisons, brokerage fees, or
other compensation, payment for services or facilities for processing or
sale, furnishing services or facilities for processing or handling,
knowingly inducing or receiving discriminatory price, or the
discriminatory use of rebates, discounts, advertising service charges, or
underselling in particular localities. See antitrust laws.
ROGATORY LETTERS a formal communication from a court in which
an action is pending, to a foreign court, requesting that the testimony of
a witness residing in such foreign jurisdiction be taken under the
direction of the court, addressed and transmitted to the court making the
request.
ROLLOVER see retirement plan.
ROR see release on own recognizance [ROR].
ROTH 401(K) see retirement plan [ROTH 401(K)].
ROTH IRA see retirement plan [ROTH IRA].
ROUND LOT SHAREHOLDERS shareholders holding blocks of 100
shares per block. The term also refers to bondholders holding bonds
with a $1,000 par value.
ROYALTY a share of the product or of the proceeds therefrom, reserved by
an owner for permitting another to exploit and use his or her property;
the rental paid to the original owner of property, based on a percentage
of profit or production. The term is employed with respect to mining
leases, conveyances, literary works, inventions and other intellectual
productions. Compare commission.
R.S. see revised statutes.
RUBRIC the title of a statute; a statute regarded as authoritative.
RULE prescribed guide for action or conduct, regulation or principle;
includes commands to lower courts or court officials to do ministerial
acts. If a standard or directive by a governmental agency is
characterized as a rule, it must be promulgated in accordance with the
procedures set down in the Administrative Procedure Act. A rule of a
court, such as a federal rule of civil or criminal procedure, is adopted
by the court itself and is subject to legislative action.
RULE AGAINST PERPETUITIES the rule that no contingent interest is
good unless it must vest, if at all, not later than 21 years after some life
in being at the creation of the interest. The rule against perpetuities is
directed against the remoteness of vesting of estates or interests in
property, and against unreasonable restraints of the power of alienation.
RULE IN SHELLEY’S CASE when in the same conveyance, an estate
for life is given to the ancestor with remainder to the ancestor’s heirs,
then the ancestor takes the fee simple (or fee tail) remainder estate and
the heirs take nothing. If, for example, A, fee owner, conveys “to B for
life, then to the heirs of B,” then B takes both the life estate and the
remainder in fee simple. The rule, created in 1324, has been abolished
in England and in a majority of American jurisdictions.
RULE IN WILD’S CASE a rule of construction by which a devise to “B
and his children,” where B has no children at the time the gift vests in
B, was read to mean a gift to B in fee tail, the words “and his children”
thus being construed as words of limitation and not words of
purchase. The popularity of the fee tail has declined, and most
American jurisdictions have repudiated the Rule in Wild’s Case, so that
such conveyances are construed to be a gift of a life estate to B, with a
remainder to his children.
RULE NISI procedure by which one party by an ex parte application or an
order to show cause calls upon another to show cause why the rule set
forth in his or her proposed order should not be made final by the court.
If no cause is shown, the court orders the rule absolute (final), thereby
requiring whatever was sought to be accomplished.
RULE OF AVOIDABLE CONSEQUENCES see mitigation of
damages.
RULE OF CAPTURE see capture.
RULE OF LAW see question of law.
RULE OF REASON in antitrust law, the principle first enunciated by the
Supreme Court in 1911 that the law is to be applied only to
“unreasonable” restraints of trade. Since then, the rule of reason has
evolved into a complex set of factors that may be considered in
resolving an antitrust case. The rule of reason has been rejected for
certain types of business conduct such as price fixing agreements,
which have been found to be illegal per se, that is, likely to harm
competition and so lacking in potential benefit that they are illegal in
and of themselves. See Sherman Antitrust Act.
RULES OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT see Code of Profes-sional
Responsibility; Model Rules of Professional Conduct.
RUN WITH THE LAND a phrase used with respect to covenants in the
law of real property to mean that the burdens and/or the benefits of the
covenant pass to the persons who succeed to the interests of the original
contracting parties. Covenants so characterized bind the owners of the
property to which they attach (with which they “run”), no matter who
those owners are; such covenants therefore represent an essentially
permanent limitation upon the estate held by the owner of the
“burdened” property, and an enhancement of the estate held by the
owner of the “benefitted” property.
EXAMPLE: Luigi divides a large building so that he can sell one-half to
another businessman. There is only one alley through which deliveries
can be made, but the alley is on Luigi’s side of the property. In the deed
of sale, Luigi includes a covenant that allows the other businessman to
use the alley. That covenant runs with the land so that anyone who buys
the store from the other businessman can enforce the covenant against
any owner of the other half of the building.
Compare chain of title.
S
SAILOR’S WILL see military will.
SALABLE merchantable; an item fit for sale in usual course of trade, at
usual selling prices. The item salable shall be of ordinary marketable
quality, bring the average price, be lawful merchandise, be good and
sufficient of its kind, and be free from any remarkable defects.
SALARY, FIXED see fixed salary.
SALE a contract by which property, real or personal, is transferred from
the seller (vendor) to the buyer (vendee) for a fixed price in money,
paid or agreed to be paid by the buyer. This is in contrast to BARTER,
which is an exchange of goods or services for another’s goods or
services. See arm’s length.
ABSOLUTE SALE a sale whereby the property passes to the buyer upon
completion of the agreement between the parties.
AUCTION SALE a public sale of goods or real property to the highest
bidder, by public outcry and competitive bidding.
BARGAIN AND SALE see bargain and sale.
BILL OF SALE see bill [BILL OF SALE].
CASH SALE see cash sale.
CONDITIONAL SALE 1. a sale in which the vendee receives possession
and right of use of the goods sold, but transfer of title to the vendee is
dependent upon performance of some condition, usually full payment
of purchase price. The conditional sale becomes absolute on fulfillment
of the condition. 2. a purchase accompanied by an agreement to resell
upon particular terms. See also SALE ON APPROVAL.
EXECUTED SALE in contrast to an EXECUTORY SALE, one wherein nothing
remains to be done by either party to effect delivery and complete
transfer of title.
EXECUTION SALE see FORCED SALE (below); sheriff’s sale.
EXECUTORY SALE in contrast to an EXECUTED SALE, an agreement to sell
wherein something remains to be done by either party before delivery
and passing of title.
FORCED SALE a sale that the seller must make immediately, without
opportunity to find a buyer who will pay a sum approaching the
reasonable worth of the item (often land). The phrase is synonymous
with JUDICIAL SALE (see sheriff’s sale), whereby the court forces the
sale of property as a result of a prior adjudication.
EXAMPLE: Marquise owes money to several creditors as a result of work
they performed on a building he owns. He avoids the creditors, and they
obtain a judicial order demanding payment. His continued refusal to pay
results in a forced sale of the building. The excess of the sale price over
the money owed is returned to Marquise.
INSTALLMENT SALE see installment sale.
JUDICIAL SALE see FORCED SALE (above); see also sheriff’s sale.
PUBLIC SALE a sale upon notice to the public and in which members of
the public may bid.
SALE BY SAMPLE a sale of goods in existence in bulk, but not pres-ent for
examination, where it is mutually understood that the goods not
exhibited will conform to the sample. Such a sale carries with it an
implied warranty that the goods purchased conform to the sample.
SALE IN GROSS sale of land by the tract or as a whole, without warranty
of quantity (acres); sometimes referred to as a CONTRACT OF HAZARD.
SALE ON APPROVAL a transaction in which goods delivered primarily for
use may be returned if the buyer is unsatisfied with them, even though
they may conform to the contract. If the goods are delivered primarily
for resale, rather than for use, the transaction is termed a SALE OR
RETURN, or the arrangement is termed a CONSIGNMENT.
SALE ON INSTALLMENT see installment sale.
SALE OR EXCHANGE see sale or exchange.
SALE WITH RIGHT OF REDEMPTION sale where seller reserves the right to
take back title to property he has sold upon repayment of the purchase
price.
SHERIFF’S SALE see FORCED SALE (above); sheriff’s sale.
TAX SALE a sale of land for the nonpayment of taxes. See foreclosure.
SALE AND LEASEBACK a procedure whereby an owner of property
sells it to another party who immediately leases the property back to the
original owner. This method is frequently employed for tax purposes or
for situations where the original owner needs cash rather than property.
SALE BY SAMPLE see sale [SALE BY SAMPLE].
SALE IN GROSS see sale [SALE IN GROSS].
SALE IN INSTALLMENTS see installment sale.
SALE ON APPROVAL see sale [SALE ON APPROVAL].
SALE OR EXCHANGE disposition of property in a value-for-value
exchange, as opposed to a disposition by gift, contribution or the like.
For income tax purposes, the realization of gain or loss on the
disposition of property is based on the sale or exchange of that property.
SALES TAX see tax [SALES TAX].
SALE WITH RIGHT OF REDEMPTION see sale [SALE WITH RIGHT OF
REDEMPTION].
SALVAGE generally, the value of property following its destruction or
loss. In maritime law, a service rendered to a vessel that removes it from
some distress; to be entitled to a salvage award, the distressed vessel
must be in impending peril of the sea from which it is rescued by the
voluntary efforts of others. In insurance law, the value of the property
following a loss, which can be deducted from the amount recovered by
the insured. In tax law, the amount, determined at the time of the
acquisition, which is estimated will be realizable upon sale or other
disposition of an asset when it is no longer useful in the taxpayer’s
business and is to be retired from service. That amount is then
calculated into a taxpayer’s permissible depreciation of the asset.
The accelerated cost recovery system does not provide for salvage
value. EQUITABLE SALVAGE is an equitable right of the last person to
preserve a property’s value to have priority over others in either that
property or its value upon realization, since without that person’s
actions the property would be worthless.
SALVAGE VALUE see depreciation [SALVAGE VALUE].
SAME-SEX MARRIAGE see civil union; marriage.
SAMPLE that which is taken out of a large quantity as a fair representation
of the whole; a part shown as evidence of the quality of the whole.
Under the Uniform Commercial Code, any sample or model that is
made part of the basis of the bargain creates an express warranty that
the whole of the goods shall conform to the sample or model.
SANCTION 1. to approve; 2. to reward or punish; 3. a consequence of
punishment for violation of accepted norms of social conduct, which
may be of two kinds: those that redress civil injuries (civil sanctions)
and those that punish crimes (penal sanctions).
SANE [SANITY] the state of sound mental condition; all persons are
presumed sane until the opposite is demonstrated. All jurisdictions
require the defendant in a criminal case to produce some evidence to
challenge this presumption. In some jurisdictions, the burden of
persuasion is borne by the state; in others, the defendant carries the
ultimate burden of proof. The allocation of this burden is apparently
within the individual state’s rules of procedure and placing the burden
on the defendant does not violate the presumption of innocence.
Compare insanity.
SANITY HEARING a proceeding authorized by statute for investigating the
sanity of a person accused of a felony. Such a hearing is not a trial
placing the accused in jeopardy, but is a “collateral inquiry” in the
nature of an inquest to determine the competency of a person to stand
trial.
SANS without.
SATISFACTION (OF A DEBT) a release and discharge of the obligation
in reference to which performance is executed. See accord and
satisfaction; ademption.
SAVE HARMLESS protect from loss or liability; indemnity; guarantee.
In contract law, signifies a commitment by one party to repay
another party to an agreement in the event of a specified loss.
EXAMPLE: A lease provides that the tenant shall save harmless the
landlord against claims for injuries to persons on the premises. As a
result of this clause, the tenant is required to reimburse the landlord in
the event such a claim is successfully prosecuted and damages are
recovered against the landlord.
SAVING CLAUSE a clause in a statute restricting the scope of the repeal
of prior statutes; language inserted in a statute to maintain existing
rights provided in the repealed law. See also grandfather clause.
SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION see bank [SAVINGS AND LOAN
ASSOCIATION].
SAVINGS BANK see bank [SAVINGS BANK].
SAVING TO SUITORS CLAUSE see admiralty courts [SAVING TO
SUITORS CLAUSE].
SCÈNE À FAIRE Fr.: for scenes to be made. Intellectual property term
involving copyright protection for nonliteral elements of dramatic
works. Software or program code is generally considered a literary work
for the purposes of copyright law. As such, nonliteral elements are
copyright-protected, but only the expression of an idea and not the idea
itself. That which is standard in the treatment of a given topic is not
copyrightable.
SCHOLARSHIPS AND FELLOWSHIPS tuition or subsistence aid given
to an individual for participation in an educational program. In general,
a fellowship or scholarship grant at an educational institution is not
subject to income taxes. However, it must not constitute compensation
for services primarily for the benefit of the grantor of the fellowship or
scholarship unless the employment is required in order for the taxpayer
to obtain a degree. If the individual receiving the grant is not a
candidate for a degree, the grantor must be a tax-exempt educational
organization or a governmental unit. The amount excludable in any one
year is $300 multiplied by the number of months for which the recipient
received amounts under the scholarship or fellowship grant during the
taxable year.
SCIENTER (sῑ’-e*n-tûr) Lat.: knowledge. Previous knowledge of operative
facts; frequently signifies guilty knowledge. As used in pleadings, the
term signifies that the alleged crime or tort was done designedly or
with guilty knowledge. The term is usually employed in relation to
fraud, and means a person’s knowledge that he was making false
representations, with intent to deceive.
EXAMPLE: A corporation files a registration statement, containing false
representations, with the Securities and Exchange Commission so that
the corporation may sell stock to the public. Applicable law holds a
party liable if with scienter he or she signs a statement that contains
false representations. The requirement of scienter means that the party
must know of the false representations and know that the statement will
be used to deceive others into purchasing stock.
See culpable; mens rea.
SCINTILLA (OF EVIDENCE) evidence that is speculative and
conjectural and is something less than substantial evidence. If at least a
scintilla of evidence is presented, some courts have held that the party
against whom the evidence is offered should not be granted a summary
judgment.
SCOPE OF AUTHORITY in the law of agency, those acts proper for the
accomplishment of the goal of the agency, including not only the actual
authorization conferred upon the agent by his or her principal, but also
that which has apparently or impliedly been delegated to the agent. As
applied to doctrine of respondeat superior, masters are liable civilly for
damages occasioned by the torts of their servants and agents committed
while acting within the scope of their authority. The proper inquiry is
whether the act was done in the course of the agency and by virtue of
the authority as agent. See also apparent authority.
SCOPE OF EMPLOYMENT those acts done while performing one’s job
duties. The phrase was adopted by the courts for the purpose of
determining employer’s liability for the acts of his or her employees.
The master (usually, the employer) is said to be vicariously liable only
for those torts of the servant (employee) that are committed within the
range of his or her job activities. See respondeat superior; employee’s
liability acts; Workers’ Compensation acts.
EXAMPLE: A professional driver employed by Escort Service, Inc.,
decides to stop home and see his wife while he is driving from one job
to another. As he drives to his home, he hits a child playing in the street.
Escort will not be responsible for the injury to the child if the driver was
not in the scope of his employment.
S CORPORATION see corporation [S CORPORATION].
SCRIP DIVIDEND see dividend.
SCRIVENER 1. an old English term referring to a writer or scribe,
particularly one who draws legal documents; 2. one who acts as agent
for another, investing and managing that other’s property for a fee.
SCRUTINY see strict scrutiny.
SCUTAGE in feudal law, a tax imposed on landholders to help pay for the
king’s army.
SEAL in common law, an impression on wax or other substance capable of
being impressed. The purpose of a seal is to attest to the execution of an
instrument. The word seal or the letters L.S. (LOCUS SIGILLI, place of the
seal) have the same significance and are commonly used for the same
purpose today.
A seal of a corporation is sometimes called a COMMON SEAL.
SEALED INSTRUMENT one that is signed and has the seal of the signer
attached. To render a contract a sealed instrument, it must be so recited
in the body of the instrument and a seal must be placed after the
signature. In common law, a sealed contract was a FORMAL CONTRACT
(as opposed to a contract without a seal, called a SIMPLE CONTRACT) and
is often called a CONTRACT UNDER SEAL; such a contract or a deed under
seal did not require consideration. Today any symbol, even the printed
word seal or the letters L.S. will, if so intended, constitute the necessary
seal. In most states, statutes have eliminated most of the special effects
of sealed instruments in common law.
SEALING OF RECORDS the sealing of criminal records, permitted in
some states with respect to youthful offenders, so that such records
may be examined only by court order.
SEARCH AND SEIZURE a police practice whereby a person or place is
searched and evidence useful in the investigation and prosecution of
crime is seized. The search and seizure is constitutionally limited by the
Fourth Amendment and Fourteenth Amendment to the United States
Constitution and by provisions in the several state constitutions, statutes
and rules of court. See also probable cause; search warrant. Compare
unreasonable search and seizure.
SEARCH, CONSENT FOR see consent search.
SEARCH ENGINE a computerized system that enables the user to type in
various search terms and receive information that fits the designated
query. For legal research, there are two main fee-based search engines
known as “LexisNexis” and “Westlaw.” See Boolean search.
SEARCH OF TITLE see title search.
SEARCH WARRANT an order issued by a judge or magistrate
authorizing certain law enforcement officers to conduct a search of
specified premises for specified things or persons. In those cases where
warrants are required, only a judge or magistrate who has not
previously considered the facts giving rise to the application can issue a
search warrant, and only upon a showing of probable cause that the
described item is located in the designated place and that it was
involved in the planning or commission of a crime.
SEASONABLE timely; in due season or time; the time in which action is
appropriate and can be effective. The word seasonably has been used
synonymously with reasonably to mean in a timely manner. See time is
of the essence.
SEASONAL relating to a specific time of the year. Seasonal employment is
the kind of occupation that can be performed only during certain periods
of the year, and does not include such occupations that may be carried
on throughout the entire year. Compare seasonable.
S.E.C. see Securities and Exchange Commission [S.E.C.].
SECOND AMENDMENT the provision in the U.S. Constitution that gives
each state the right to maintain a “well regulated Militia” and “the
people to keep and bear Arms.” The debates that led to the adoption of
the Second Amendment indicate that its purpose was to prevent federal
interference with state militia and the creation of a national army that
would destroy local autonomy. The Second Amendment thus does not
apply to private conduct, to state action, or to federal gun control laws
that do not interfere with state militia.
SECONDARY AFFINITY see affinity [SECONDARY AFFINITY].
SECONDARY BOYCOTT see boycott [SECONDARY BOYCOTT].
SECONDARY DISTRIBUTION an organized offering of stock that is
already issued and outstanding, usually distributed by a syndicate.
Typical sources of large blocks of stock for redistribution are founders,
insiders and major investors.
SECONDARY LIABILITY see liability [SECONDARY LIABILITY].
SECONDARY PARTY a person obligated to pay a debt if the person
incurring the debt fails to pay the creditor. The parties to whom the
creditor may then go for repayment are secondarily liable.
EXAMPLE: Abe receives a check for a debt owed to him. He signs the
check and turns it over to a friend to whom he owes money. Abe is
secondarily liable on the check, so that if the check is dishonored, the
friend can look to Abe for payment.
SECOND-DEGREE see murder [SECOND-DEGREE MURDER]; principal
[PRINCIPAL IN THE SECOND-DEGREE].
SECOND MORTGAGE see mortgage [SECOND MORTGAGE].
SECRET SERVICE see Department of Homeland Security [DHS]
[UNITED STATES SECRET SERVICE].
SECRETS OF TRADE see trade secrets.
SECTION 1231 PROPERTY see capital [§1231 PROPERTY].
SECUNDUM (se*-ku@n’-du*m) Lat.: immediately after; next to.
SECURED CREDITOR a creditor who holds security that will cover the
amount the debtor owes him or her. Among these securities may be
mortgages, deeds, bills of sale, liens upon goods, etc. The definition in
the Bankruptcy Act is narrower in that it applies only to those creditors
who hold security for the debt on property belonging to the bankrupt.
See credit; security interest.
SECURED TRANSACTIONS see security interest.
SECURITIES stock certificates, bonds, or other evidence of a secured
indebtedness or of a right created in the holder to participate in profits
or assets distribution of a profit-making enterprise; more generally,
written assurances for the return or payment of money; instruments
giving to their legal holders the right to money or other property. As
such, securities have value and are used in regular channels of
commerce. The basic purpose of the sale of securities is to raise capital
for businesses and government. Historically, securities have been an
area of major investment and speculation by banks and individuals.
Unbridled trading by unscrupulous speculators that led to inflated
securites markets and contributed to the great financial crash of the late
1920s resulted in the passage of the Securities Act of 1933, and the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (see Securities Acts), both of which
strictly regulate the buying and selling of securities. Securities are also
regulated by state laws known as Blue Sky laws.
The most common types of securities are:
BLUE CHIP STOCK see blue chip stock.
BOND essentially, a loan agreement respresenting a debt. In return for the
capital given to a corporation or a government entity, the bondholder
gets a promise of repayment of principal and interest over time,
instead of ownership rights. Since the holder of a bond is a creditor
instead of an owner, his or her claims against the assets of a corporation
are satisfied first in case of a failure of the business venture. Most bonds
are secured by some kind of collateral, so that in case of default, the
debt might still be satisfied. Consequently, bonds are generally a lower
risk investment. Unsecured bonds are called debentures. Bonds raise
money commonly known as DEBT CAPITAL. See bond.
BONUS STOCK see bonus stock.
CAPITAL STOCK see capital [CAPITAL STOCK].
CLASSIFIED STOCK see classified stock.
COMMON STOCK see STOCK (below).
CONVERTIBLE SECURITY see convertible securities.
DEBT CAPITAL see BOND (above).
DIVIDEND see dividend.
EQUITY CAPITAL see STOCK (below).
GROWTH STOCK see growth stock.
GUARANTEED SECURITY see guaranteed security.
INVESTMENT STOCK see restricted securities.
JOINT STOCK COMPANY see company [JOINT STOCK COMPANY].
LETTER STOCK see restricted securities.
LISTED STOCK see listed stock.
NONASSESSABLE STOCK see nonassessable stock.
NONSTOCK CORPORATION see nonstock corporation.
NO-PAR [NONPAR] STOCK see no-par [nonpar] stock.
PREFERRED STOCK see STOCK (below).
PUBLIC SECURITIES those certificates and other negotiable instruments
evidencing the debt of a governmental body.
RESTRICTED SECURITIES see restricted securities.
STOCK an equity or ownership interest in a corporation, usually created
by a contribution to the capital of the corporation. Its unit of
measurement is the share, and the owner of one or more shares of stock
in a company is entitled to participate in the company’s management
and profits, and in distribution of assets upon dissolution of the
company. Ownership of stock may be evidenced by a written
instrument known as a stock certificate. Distribution of profits to
stockholders occurs through the payment of dividends. However, for
tax purposes, not all corporations pay dividends to their stockholders,
but rather reinvest profits in the business, thereby increasing the value
of the stock to the investor.
There are two general types of stock. COMMON STOCK is the ordinary
stock of the corporation that entitles the owner to pro rata dividends
without any priority or preference over any other shareholders or class
of shareholders but equally with all other shareholders except preferred
stockholders. PREFERRED STOCK is a class of stock entailing certain
rights beyond those attached to common stock; corporate stock having
preference rights over other kinds of stock in the payment of dividends.
It represents a contribution to the capital of the corporation and is in no
sense a loan of money. The dividends come out of earnings [income]
and not out of capital. Unless there are net earnings there is no right to
dividends. Other rights that may be attendant to preferred stock are
limitless; however, whatever rights are given must be clearly noted. It is
part of the capital stock of a corporation that enjoys priority over the
remaining stock, or common stock, in the distribution of profits and, in
the event of dissolution of the corporation, in the distribution of assets
as well. The issuance of stock raises money commonly known as
EQUITY CAPITAL.
STOCK ISSUE see issue [STOCK ISSUE].
TREASURY STOCK see treasury stock.
UNLISTED STOCK see unlisted security.
WATERED STOCK see watered stock.
WHEN ISSUED SECURITIES see when issued securities.
SECURITIES ACT OF 1933 see Securities Acts [SECURITIES ACT OF
1933].
SECURITIES ACTS popular name of the two primary federal statutes
regulating the issuing of and market trading in corporate securities. The
Securities Act of 1933 deals primarily with initial distribution of
securities by the issuer: its objective is to provide full disclosure of
material facts about securities for sale so that investors may be able to
make informed investment decisions. The Securities Exchange Act of
1934 is designed to regulate postdistribution trading in securities and
provides for the registration and regulation of securities exchanges, as
well as for the prohibition of fraud and manipulation in sale or purchase
of securities.
INVESTMENT COMPANY ACT OF 1940 regulates publicly owned companies
engaged primarily in the business of investing and trading in securities.
INVESTORS ADVISERS ACT OF 1940 act that establishes a scheme of
registration and regulation of investment advisers comparable to that
contained in the SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 (above) with respect
to broker–dealers but not as comprehensive. A limited private cause of
action for rescission but not damages has been found to be implied in
the act.
PUBLIC UTILITY HOLDING COMPANY ACT OF 1935 act that regulates the
financing and operation of electric and gas public utility holding
company systems.
SECURITIES INVESTOR PROTECTION ACT OF 1970 act that established the
Securities Investor Protection Corporation [S.I.P.C.] and gave it the
power to supervise the liquidation of financially troubled securities
firms and the payment of the claims of their customers.
TRUST INDENTURE ACT OF 1939 act that regulates public issuers of large
debt securities—i.e., over $5,000,000.
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION [SEC] the federal
agency empowered to regulate and supervise the selling of securities, to
prevent unfair practices on security exchanges and over-the-counter
markets, and to maintain a fair and orderly market for the investor. The
Commodity Futures Trading Commission fulfills a similar role in the
regulation of commodity futures and option markets. See also
Administrative Procedure Act; proxy.
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 see Securities Acts
[SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934].
SECURITIES INVESTOR PROTECTION ACT OF 1970 see
Securities Acts [SECURITIES INVESTOR PROTECTION ACT OF 1970].
SECURITIES INVESTOR PROTECTION CORPORATION [SIPC] a
nonprofit corporation supported by its membership of securities
brokers and dealers, developed to protect their customers and to
promote confidence in the securities markets. In principle, SIPC
provides certain amounts of insurance on cash and securities left on
deposit in a brokerage account.
SECURITY protection, safety; the instrument of protection or safety; a
person who becomes the surety for another. Generally, instruments for
the payment of money, or evidencing title or equity, with or without
some collateral obligation, and which are commonly dealt in for the
purpose of financing and investment. Also, an investment in some
private or public business enterprise. Components of a security are: (1)
an investment of money, (2) in a common enterprise, (3) with an
expectation of profits solely from the efforts of others. See bankruptcy;
Securities Exchange Act of 1934. See generally securities; securities
acts.
SECURITY DEPOSIT money that a tenant deposits with the landlord to
assure that the tenant will abide by the lease agreements; a fund from
which the landlord may obtain payment for damages caused by the
tenant during his or her occupancy.
SECURITY INTEREST an interest in real property or personal
property that secures the payment of an obligation. In common law,
security interests are either consensual (by agreement) or arise by
operation of law, as in the case of judgment liens and statutory liens.
EXAMPLE: In order to obtain a loan from a bank, Omar uses a very
valuable painting as collateral. The bank has a security interest in the
painting and can acquire ownership of it if the loan is not repaid.
PURCHASE-MONEY SECURITY INTEREST one taken or retained by the
seller of the collateral to secure all or part of its price.
SEDITION illegal action that tends to cause the disruption and overthrow
of the government.
EXAMPLE: Cathy sabotages a Federal Bureau of Investigation computer
that lists the names of all of the most wanted criminals, thus committing
a seditious act. Liability for such an act extends beyond a mere charge
of destroying government property.
See treason. Compare clear and present danger.
SEDITIOUS LIBEL in English law a misdemeanor involving the
publishing of any words or document, with an intention to promote
feelings of ill will or contempt between the classes or towards the
government. The law of seditious libel is not severely circumscribed in
the United States by the First Amendment to the Constitution. See
freedom [FREEDOM OF PRESS]; [FREEDOM OF SPEECH].
SEDUCTION inducing a chaste, unmarried woman, by means of
temptation, deception, acts, flattery or a promise of marriage, to engage
in sexual intercourse. Compare rape.
SEGREGATION setting apart; the separation of some persons or things
from others. For instance, a contract may require a party to keep certain
funds segregated so that they will be available for payment.
In constitutional law, segregation is the maintenance of separate
facilities and institutions for people of different races. The racial
segregation that prevailed in this country until the 1950s was based on
the theory that separate but equal facilities met the constitutional
requirements of the equal protection clause. In the landmark case of
Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954), segregation
resulting from state action was held to be violative of the equal
protection clause. After a period of 15 years, the deliberate speed with
which all vestiges of public school segregation was to end was rejected
in favor of a standard of immediate implementation. See de facto [DE
FACTO SEGREGATION].
SEIGNEUR [SEIGNIOR] (se@’-nyôr) generally, Fr.: master, lord; more
specifically, the lord of a fee or of a manor.
SEISED the condition of legally owning realty. The phrase imports legal
title as opposed to beneficial ownership.
EXAMPLE: A father owning apartment houses that are fully rented
conveys the houses to his son. The son is thus seised of the buildings.
He has legal title to them, but, because the tenants have leases that allow
them to remain in their apartments, he cannot do with the buildings as
he pleases until all the leases expire.
SEISIN in early English property law, the term to describe the interest in
land of one who held a freehold estate. The term ownership was not
used, since the sovereign (king) was technically owner of all lands in
England; a landholder was instead said to be seised of his estate. A
voluntary transfer of the holder’s interest was accomplished by livery of
seisin. Today, seisin is generally considered synonymous with
ownership.
SEISIN, COVENANT OF see covenant [COVENANT OF SEISIN AND RIGHT
TO CONVEY].
SEIZURE 1. the act of forcibly dispossessing an owner of property, under
actual or apparent authority of law; 2. the taking of property into the
custody of the court in satisfaction of a judgment, or in consequence
of a violation of law. See attachment; garnishment; in rem; levy. See
search and seizure.
SELECTIVE ALLOCATION see marshaling [marshaling][SELECTIVE
ALLOCATION].
SELECTIVE INCORPORATION the process by which certain of the
guarantees expressed in the Bill of Rights become applicable to the
states through the Fourteenth Amendment. Under the TOTAL
INCORPORATION APPROACH, an approach never adopted by a majority of
the Supreme Court, all the Bill of Rights and the attendant case law
interpreting them, are applied to the states. Under the selective
incorporation approach, select guarantees in the Bill of Rights and their
related case law are applied to the states.
SELECTIVE SERVICE SYSTEM the system established under the
Selective Service Act by which persons are selected to serve in the
armed forces in order to ensure the security of this country. Every male
citizen or resident of the United States who is between the ages of 18
and 26 years is required to register for potential selection to serve in the
armed forces. The requirement that only men and not women register
does not violate the Fifth Amendment. Since women are not eligible
for combat duty and the purpose of the registration system is to ensure
the availability of combat troops, the statute has been found to bear a
reasonable relationship to a legitimate legislative purpose. While males
are required to register, none has been drafted into the armed forces
since the end of the Vietnam War. See military law.
SELF-DEALING type of securities trading in which a party acts upon
secret information obtained by his or another’s special position in the
corporation. It may involve sale or purchase of stock by the director,
officers and majority shareholders of a corporation. See fiduciary;
insider.
SELF-DEFENSE the self-protection of one’s person, or preservation of
members of one’s family, and, to a lesser extent, one’s property, from
harm by an aggressor, in a way and under circumstances that the law
recognizes as justifying the protective measures. It is a valid defense to
a criminal charge or to tort liability. See justification.
EXAMPLE: Ty is assaulted and in an act of self-defense hits the mugger.
Even if that blow was strong enough to knock the mugger unconscious,
Ty still has a valid defense for his assault against the mugger. If the
mugger is unconscious and Ty then hits him with a brick and kills him,
Ty would not be able to assert he was acting in self-defense since the
mugger was no longer in a position to harm him. Ty would be liable in
that circumstance to prosecution for murder.
SELF-HELP the right or fact of redressing or preventing wrongs by one’s
own action, without resort to legal proceedings, but without BREACH OF
THE PEACE (see breach).
EXAMPLE: Tim’s car is stolen. Two weeks later he sees the car in a
downtown auto repair shop. Tim can employ self-help and drive the car
away without calling the police to aid him if he so desires. Likewise, if
Tim had been behind in his car payments, the creditor could come and
take the car to satisfy the debt without legal process so long as there is
no breach of the peace.
SELF-INCRIMINATION, PRIVILEGE AGAINST the constitutional
right of a person to refuse to answer questions or otherwise give
testimony against himself or herself that will create substantial
likelihood of criminal incrimination.
The privilege can be displaced by a grant of USE IMMUNITY, which
guarantees that neither the compelled testimony nor any fruits will be
used against the witness. Given such immunity, the witness is no longer
exposed to the hazard of self-incrimination and thus must respond to
questions or provide evidence. Some states still give such witnesses a
broader form of immunity known as TRANSACTIONAL IMMUNITY, which
protects the witness not merely from use of his or her testimony but
from any prosecution relating to transactions about which relevant
testimony was elicited. It should be emphasized that the privilege
against self-incrimination, like all constitutional rights, may be waived.
Miranda warnings are generally necessary before such a waiver will be
found to qualify a confession as admissible evidence in a criminal trial.
See Fifth Amendment. Compare contempt of court; immunity.
SELLER in commercial law, a person who sells or contracts to sell goods;
in securities law, entities who conduct is a substantial factor in causing a
purchaser to buy a security. Compare merchant.
SELLING SHORT the selling of securities, commodities or foreign
currency that are not actually owned by the seller. In making the short
sell, the seller hopes to cover—that is, buy back—sold items at a higher
price and thus earn a profit.
COMMODITY SHORT SALES short sales accomplished in the futures
market. A speculator wishing to take advantage of an expected decline
in a commodity can sell a large quantity of the commodity for future
delivery. Compare margin.
SEMINAL leading; contributing the seed of later development; original,
creative, and influential.
SENILE DEMENTIA insanity that occurs as the result of old age,
progressive in character, and resulting in collapse of mental faculties
that, in its final state, deprives one of testamentary capacity because of
loss of power to reason or act sanely.
EXAMPLE: Warren had a valid will, but as he neared death, he changed
certain provisions. When the will was read subsequent to Warren’s
death, there was a challenge as to Warren’s capacity to change it. After
hearing evidence that Warren claimed he spoke to dead people and was
king of a nonexistent country, the court found that he had suffered from
senile dementia, and therefore disallowed the changes.
See competent; incompetency.
SENIOR MORTGAGE see mortgage [SENIOR MORTGAGE].
SENTENCE punishment ordered by a court for a person convicted of a
crime, usually either a NONCUSTODIAL SENTENCE such as probation or a
fine, or a CUSTODIAL SENTENCE such as a term of imprisonment.
CONCURRENT SENTENCE a sentence that overlaps with another as
opposed to a consecutive [cumulative] sentence, which runs by itself,
beginning after or ending before the running of another sentence.
CONDITIONAL DISCHARGE SENTENCE see SUSPENDED SENTENCE (below).
CONSECUTIVE [CUMULATIVE] SENTENCE a sentence that runs separately
from one or more other sentences to be served by the same individual.
The sentence is cumulative to the extent that it begins after an existing
sentence has terminated either by expiration of the maximum term of
the existing sentence, or by release from the present sentence through
parole. If the consecutive sentence is a custodial one, the parole will be
“to the cell” (called CELL PAROLE), so that the consecutive sentence may
be served during the period of the parole.
DEFERRED SENTENCE a sentence not imposed unless the defendant
violates the conditions of probation.
DETERMINATE SENTENCE a sentence imposed for a definite rather than
indefinite term. It may be a mandatory sentence or a sentence imposed
within a permissible range by the exercise of judicial discretion.
ENHANCED SENTENCE see three strikes [SENTENCE ENHANCEMENT].
EXTENDED TERM heavier punishment imposed on a criminal defendant
by virtue of his or her criminal record and the perception that as a
persistent or multiple offender an increased sentence is warranted.
INDETERMINATE SENTENCE a sentence for the maximum period
prescribed by law for the particular offense committed, subject to the
provision of the statute that the custodial portion may be terminated
sooner by the board of parole any time after the expiration of the
minimum period required for parole eligibility.
EXAMPLE: Carter, a youth, is given an indeterminate sentence for
burglary. Since the maximum sentence for any youth in Carter’s state is
three years, his punishment will not exceed that length. But, as an
indeterminate sentence, the time he actually serves will be determined
by the prison authorities based on his adjustment at the prison. He is
thereby encouraged to make a positive adjustment.
INTERLOCUTORY SENTENCE 1. a temporary or provisional sentence,
pending the imposition of a final sentence; 2. a sentence on a
supplementary question derived from the main cause of action.
MANDATORY SENTENCE a custodial sentence that the legislature has
required to be imposed upon persons convicted of certain offenses. If
the criminal statute requires a certain minimum period of incarceration,
no discretion to suspend the sentence exists in the trial court. The
legislative command must be unequivocal, because courts hesitate to
find their judicial discretion curtailed; the legislature normally provides
explicitly for the mandatory sentence by stating that a certain minimum
sentence shall be imposed and that it may not be suspended nor may the
defendant be released on probation or parole until that minimum term
has been served. Only executive clemency by way of commutation of
the minimum term can relieve the defendant of a mandatory sentence.
PRESENTENCE REPORT see presentence report.
SENTENCE ENHANCEMENT see three strikes [SENTENCE ENHANCEMENT].
SPLIT SENTENCE a sentence part of which is served in jail and the
remainder of which is served on probation.
SUSPENDED SENTENCE one whose imposition or execution has been
withheld by the court on certain terms and conditions. An implied
condition is always that the defendant not commit further violation of
the law during a fixed period. Where no such period is fixed by the
court, the practical effect of the suspended sentence is similar to an
UNCONDITIONAL DISCHARGE sentence, i.e., the matter is terminated
without conditions. A CONDITIONAL DISCHARGE is a suspended sentence
on particular conditions for a period that is expressly fixed by the court
or by statute. See also pretrial intervention.
SENTENCE ENHANCEMENT see three strikes [SENTENCE
ENHANCEMENT].
SENTIENT aware; perceptive; responsive to or conscious of sensory
impressions.
SEPARABLE CONTROVERSY within removal statute, a claim or cause
of action that is part of the entire controversy yet by its nature can be
severed from the whole. For a case to present a separable controversy
within the statute providing for removal of causes to the federal court,
federal statute provides that whenever a separate and independent claim
or cause of action, which would be removable if sued upon alone, is
joined with one or more otherwise nonremovable claims or causes of
action, the entire case may be removed and the district court may
determine all issues therein, or in its discretion, may remand all matters
not otherwise within its original jurisdiction.
SEPARATE BUT EQUAL a doctrine under which equality of treatment is
accorded when the races are provided substantially equal facilities, even
though these facilities are separate. Although the doctrine has not been
per se eliminated from American jurisprudence, its application to most
aspects of society has been found to violate the equal protection clause
of the Fourteenth Amendment. The violation is not so much directed
toward the physical aspects of separate facilities, but rather the
intangible harm that results from the segregation that is a by-product of
the doctrine. For example, the Supreme Court has found that the mere
segregation of minority and white students in public education creates a
sense of inferiority that significantly impedes the educational and
mental development of minority children.
SEPARATION see divorce [SEPARATION [DIVORCE A MENSA ET THORO]].
SEPARATION AGREEMENT a written agreement by a husband and
wife who are separated or about to separate or divorce; provides for the
distribution of marital property and, when applicable, support by one
spouse for the other. See divorce [SEPARATION]; postnuptial
agreement; prenuptial agreement.
SEPARATION OF POWER the doctrine prohibiting one branch of
government, at any level, federal, state or local, from infringing or
encroaching upon or exercising the powers belonging to another branch.
SEQUESTER to separate from; to hold aside.
SEQUESTRATION 1. in equity, the act of seizing property belonging to
another and holding it until profits have paid the demand for which the
property was taken.
2. In common law, juries (at least in capital cases) were always
sequestered, i.e., kept together throughout the trial and jury
deliberations, and guarded from improper contact until they were
discharged. This common law right to demand jury sequestration has
been replaced in most jurisdictions with discretion in the trial court to
grant sequestration in the interests of justice.
3. Sequestration of witnesses is frequently ordered by the court at the
request of one of the parties to insure that in-court testimony of each
witness not be colored by what another witness said.
EXAMPLE: The prosecutor believed that defense witnesses might alter
their versions of the facts if they were permitted to hear the State’s
witnesses testify. To avoid that problem, he asked for the sequestration
of all witnesses. The judge agreed and excluded all potential witnesses
from the courtroom until they were called to testify.
SERIAL BOND see bond [SERIAL BOND].
SERIATIM (se*r’-e@-ä’-tĭm) Lat.: in due order; in succession; one by one.
SERIES BOND see bond [SERIES BOND].
SERVANT one who works for, and is subject to, the control of his master;
a person employed to perform services for another and who in the
performance of the services is subject to the other’s control or right to
control.
In determining whether one acting for another is a servant or an
independent contractor, the following matters of fact, among others, are
considered: (1) the extent of control which, by the agreement, the
master may exercise over the details of the work; (2) whether or not the
one employed is engaged in a distinct occupation or business; (3) the
kind of occupation, with reference to whether, in the locality, the work
is usually done under the direction of the employer or by a specialist
without supervision; (4) the skill required in the particular occupation;
(5) whether the employer or the workman supplies the instrumentalities,
tools and the place of work for the person doing the work; (6) the length
of time for which the person is employed; (7) the method of payment,
whether by the time or by the job; (8) whether or not the work is a part
of the regular business of the employer; (9) whether or not the parties
believe they are creating the relation of master and servant; and (10)
whether the principal is or is not in business. A master is in many
instances liable, under the theory of respondeat superior, for the torts
of his servant, but not for those of an independent contractor. See fellow
servant rule; master and servant. Compare agent; contractor
[INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR].
SERVE see service.
SERVICE (OF PROCESS) delivery of a pleading, notice or other paper
in a suit, to the opposite party, to charge that party with receipt of it and
subject him or her to its legal effect; communication of the substance of
the process to the defendant, either by actual delivery or by other
methods, whereby defendant is furnished with reasonable notice of the
proceedings against him or her, to afford defendant the opportunity to
appear and be heard.
EXAMPLE: Tamara files a lawsuit against a company, but the company
never responds. Before entering a default judgment against the
company, the judge demands proof that the company was served with
notice of the suit. Without such proof, the judge cannot be sure that the
company knows there is a suit against it.
PERSONAL SERVICE actual delivery to the party to be served.
SERVICE BY MAIL may be permitted either by court rule or, under
unusual circumstances, as the court may authorize.
SERVICE BY PUBLICATION CONSTRUCTIVE SERVICE accomplished by
publishing the notice in a newspaper designated by the court, and in
some jurisdictions, by mailing that newspaper to the last-known
address of the party.
SUBSTITUTED SERVICE constructive service accomplished by service to a
recognized representative or agent of the party to be served.
SERVICES at common law, the acts done by an English feudal tenant for
the benefit of his lord, which formed the consideration for the property
granted to him by his lord. Services were of several types, including
knight’s service, military service, and the more varied kind of certain
and determinate service called socage. See also tenure.
SERVIENT ESTATE in relation to an easement, an estate that is
burdened by the SERVITUDE, i.e., an estate that is subject to some use by
the owner of the dominant estate; also called SERVIENT TENEMENT.
SERVITUDE, EQUITABLE see equitable servitude.
SERVITUDES in constitutional law, a condition of enforced compulsory
service of one to another that is prohibited by the U.S. Constitution,
Thirteenth Amendment, except as punishment for a convicted
criminal; charges or incumbrances that follow the land, and are
distinguishable from easements in that easement usually refers to a
right enjoyed whereas servitudes refer to a burden imposed.
SESSION LAWS laws bound in volumes in the order of their enactment by
a state legislature, before possible codification. See code.
SET ASIDE to annul or make void. See reversal.
SETBACK legal minimum distance between new construction and an
existing structure or the street. Setbacks are regulated by ordinances
and building codes.
SETOFF 1. a counterclaim by defendant against plaintiff that grows
from an independent cause of action and diminishes the plaintiff’s
potential recovery; a counterdemand arising out of a transaction
different from that on which the plaintiff’s cause of action is based. It
does not deny the justice of the plaintiff’s claim but seeks to balance it
in whole or in part by a counterobligation alleged to be due by the
plaintiff to the defendant in another transaction.
2. In tax law, setoff allows the amount of refund that a taxpayer
could claim to be offset against the amount of deficiency that could be
properly assessed; conversely, the amount of deficiency the government
could assess can be offset by the amount the taxpayer could properly
claim as a refund for the same taxable year.
SETTLEMENT conclusive resolving of a matter; especially, a
compromise achieved by adverse parties in a civil suit before final
judgment, whereby they agree between themselves upon their
respective rights and obligations, thus eliminating the necessity of
judicial resolution of the controversy.
EXAMPLE: A company is accused of discriminatory hiring practices by
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). The
Commission will usually file with the company a notice of its
accusations and will attempt to reach a settlement before looking to the
courts. That method generally gives each party more flexibility. In
certain instances, a judge may have to approve the settlement.
Compare plea bargaining.
SETTLOR [DONOR; TRUSTOR] one who creates a trust by giving real
or personal property in trust to another (the trustee) for the benefit of
a third person (the beneficiary). One who gives such property is said to
settle it on, or bring title to rest with, the trustee.
SEVENTH AMENDMENT the amendment to the U.S. Constitution that
guarantees the right to a jury trial in any civil case before a federal
court if the amount in controversy exceeds $20. Each civil litigant in a
federal court is entitled to a jury of 6 to 12 persons before a judge
capable of instructing them on the law, and a unanimous verdict.
However, trial by jury is not automatic; rather a party must specifically
request it. A litigant is not entitled to have a jury decide equitable
claims. However, when a case includes both legal and equitable causes
of action, each litigant is entitled to have the legal issues decided by the
jury prior to the resolution of the equitable issues.
SEVER see severance.
SEVERABLE CONTRACT one that, in the event of a breach by one of
the parties, may be justly considered as several independent agreements
expressed in a single instrument. Where a contract is deemed
severable, a breach thereof may constitute a default of only part of the
contract, saving the defaulting party from the necessity of responding in
damages for breach of the entire agreement.
A severable contract may in fact be a series of DIVISIBLE CONTRACTS
so that each part may be supported by a separate consideration and
involve separate suits for breach of contract.
SEVERABLE STATUTE one the remainder of which is still valid when a
portion has been declared invalid, because the parts of the statute are
not wholly interdependent. If the remaining part of the statute is capable
of separate enforcement, the statute is said to be severable. The
legislature may express its intent in a SEVERABILITY CLAUSE at the end
of the act. See saving clause.
EXAMPLE: Congress passes a comprehensive piece of legislation
attacking racial discrimination in all areas. If the Supreme Court finds a
part of the legislation unconstitutional, the Court will eliminate it. Since
the legislation is severable, the rest of the provisions remain in force.
SEVERAL [SEVERALLY] separate. 1. In a note, each who severally
promises to pay is responsible separately for the entire amount. 2. In a
judgment against more than one defendant, arising out of one action,
each may be liable for the entire amount of the judgment, thereby
permitting the successful plaintiff to recover the entire amount of the
judgment from any defendant against whom he chooses to institute a
suit. See contribution; joint and several; joint tortfeasors.
SEVERALTY refers to the sole holding of property. A tenant in severalty
holds land exclusively for the duration of his or her estate without any
other person holding joint rights.
SEVERANCE act of separating; state of being disjoined. l. a process for
selecting a particular charge against the defendant, so that only one
charge or only properly joined charges are before the jury in one trial.
2. the disjoinder, for separate trials, of two or more defendants named
in the same indictment or information; a useful device where
prejudice might arise to one or more of the defendants if they were tried
together.
EXAMPLE: Liu Wei is on trial with two other well-known criminals. He
feels that the association between him and the others will sway a jury to
convict him regardless of the evidence. Liu Wei asks the trial judge for a
severance so that he will have a better opportunity for a fair trial.
3. Severance of claims is also available in civil trials to prevent
prejudice or for the convenience of the parties. A court may sever the
issue of liability from the issue of damages and direct that the question
of liability be determined first. Once liability is established the parties
may agree upon the damages, avoiding a lengthy trial on that issue.
SEVERE of an extreme degree, beyond endurance. For example, in
determining whether a plaintiff has succeeded in showing severe
emotional distress, both the intensity and duration of the emotional
distress suffered must be considered in determining whether the distress
is of such substantial quantity or enduring quality that no reasonable
person in a civilized society should be expected to endure it.
SEX OFFENDER person convicted of a sexual offense such as rape
(sexual assault), sexual contact, or lewdness. In some states sexual
activity between consenting adults of the same sex is classified as
criminal. Some states house sex offenders together and offer specialized
counseling programs in an effort to successfully treat such offenders and
thus prevent recidivism. Many states require lifetime registration of
offenders with law enforcement.
SEXTING act of an individual sending photographs or text messages by
cellphone to others or for posting on the Internet that contain sexually
suggestive messages or images, including nude or semi-nude
photographs of the sender. Often the sender is a young person and the
courts must balance prosecution for dissemination of child pornography
with normal adolescent development in the age of digital technology.
SEXUAL ABUSE see rape [SEXUAL ABUSE].
SEXUAL ASSAULT see rape [SEXUAL ASSAULT].
SEXUAL CONTACT see rape [SEXUAL CONTACT].
SEXUAL EXPLOITATION the participation by a person in prostitution,
sexual servitude, or the production of pornographic or obscene
materials as a result of being subjected to a threat, deception, coercion,
abduction, force, abuse of authority, debt bondage, or fraud. Even in the
absence of any of these factors, where the person participating in
prostitution, sexual servitude, or the production of pornographic
materials is under the age of 18, sexual exploitation shall be deemed to
exist. CHILD PORNOGRAPHY means any visual depiction, including any
photograph, film, video, picture, or computer-generated image or
picture of a minor (person under 18) engaging in sexually explicit
conduct. Possession and distribution of child pornography is strictly
regulated. The PROTECT ACT (“Protect” is an acronym for Prosecutorial
Remedies and Other Tools to end the Exploitation of Children Today) is
a federal statute making it a crime to offer or solicit sexually explicit
images of children, regardless of whether the material turns out to
consist solely of computer-generated images or digitally altered
photographs of adults, or even if the offer is fraudulent and the material
does not exist at all. Among its many provisions, the Act also bars
pretrial release of persons charged with specified offenses against or
involving children; provides for mandatory life imprisonment of sex
offenses against a minor if the offender has a similar prior record;
authorizes wiretapping in cases related to child abuse or kidnapping;
and eliminates statutes of limitations for child abduction or abuse and
establishes a program to obtain criminal history background checks for
volunteer organizations. The First Amendment has been held not to
apply to offers to provide or requests to obtain child pornography.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT see harassment [SEXUAL HARASSMENT].
SEXUAL SERVITUDE see involuntary servitude; trafficking [HUMAN
TRAFFICKING].
SHALL often used to denote an obligation or direction to do some act;
however, it is sometimes considered to be permissive where it is
necessary to give effect to the intent of the word, and to mean the same
as the word “may.”
SHAM PLEADING one so clearly false that it presents no issue of fact to
be determined by a trial. A complaint or answer will be stricken as
sham only when it is undisputed that the alleged claim or defense is
wholly unsupported by facts.
SHAM TRANSACTION see transaction [SHAM TRANSACTION].
SHARE a portion of something; an interest in a corporation. See stock;
stock certificate.
SHARE AND SHARE ALIKE in equal shares. The phrase is normally
used to describe the division of property among a class of persons on a
per capita basis; however, other language in the controlling legal
document, such as a will or a trust, may require the property to be
divided per stirpes.
SHARED APPRECIATION MORTGAGE see mortgage [SHARED
APPRECIATION MORTGAGE].
SHARE, ELECTIVE see widow’s election.
SHAREHOLDER proprietor of one or more shares of the stock of a
corporation. A stockholder possesses the evidence, usually stock
certificates, of real ownership of a portion of the property in actual or
potential existence held by the company in its name for the common
benefit of all the owners of the entire capital stock of the company. See
also round-lot shareholders.
EXAMPLE: Grace feels that a small company named Venta has a great
future profit potential. She has some money that she can afford to risk
so she becomes a shareholder in Venta. By purchasing shares, she
becomes a part owner of the company and is entitled to share in
dividends and to vote on certain company affairs.
SHAREHOLDERS’ DERIVATIVE ACTION see stockholders’
derivative action.
SHAREHOLDER’S EQUITY see equity.
SHELL CORPORATION see corporation [SHELL CORPORATION.]
SHELLEY’S CASE, RULE IN see Rule in Shelley’s Case.
SHELTER see tax shelter.
SHEPARDIZING see spading [SHEPARDIZING].
SHERIFF’S SALE [JUDICIAL SALE] a sale of property by the sheriff
under authority of a court’s judgment and writ of execution in order to
satisfy an unpaid judgment, mortgage, lien or other debt of the owner
(judgment debtor). See sale.
SHERMAN ANTITRUST ACT see antitrust laws.
SHIELD LAWS in the case of news persons, laws designed to protect a
journalist’s confidential sources of information and to protect other
information, notes and materials from disclosure. In the case of rape
victims, laws that limit the questions a defendant may ask about the
lifestyle of the victim unless those questions can be shown to be
essential for a fair trial. See journalist’s privilege; privileged
communication.
SHIFTING INTEREST see interest [SHIFTING INTEREST].
SHIFTING THE BURDEN OF PROOF transferring to the other party in
a litigation the burden that one party has in producing evidence to
support his or her claim; requires that the person who originally had the
burden make out a prima facie case or defense by some minimum of
evidence. See burden of proof.
SHIFTING USE see use [SHIFTING USE]. See also interest [EXECUTORY
INTEREST].
SHIPMENT CONTRACT see tender [TENDER OF DELIVERY].
SHOP see closed shop; open shop; union shop.
SHORT AGAINST THE BOX see selling short [SHORT AGAINST THE
BOX].
SHORT FORM MERGER see merger [SHORT FORM MERGER].
SHORT RATE in insurance law, a term applied to a mutual rescission of
insurance by both parties, who then contract for a new policy that is
identical with the original except for a shortened term and lower earned
premium.
SHORT SELLING see selling short.
SHORT SWING PROFITS see insider [SHORT SWING PROFITS].
SHORT TANDEM REPEATS [STR] see DNA testing [SHORT TANDEM
REPEATS [STR]].
SHORT-TERM CAPITAL GAIN see capital [CAPITAL GAINS OR LOSSES].
SHOW CAUSE ORDER an order, made upon the motion of one party,
requiring a party to appear and show cause (demonstrate) why a certain
thing should be permitted or not permitted. It requires that party to meet
the prima facie case made by the applicant’s verified complaint or
affidavit. An order to show cause is an accelerated method of beginning
a litigation by compelling the adverse party to respond in a much
shorter period of time than he or she would normally have to respond to
a complaint.
EXAMPLE: A group of prisoners petitions a court to allow them greater
visitation rights than their present one-visit-a-month allotment. The
judge is inclined to agree with them and orders prison officials to show
cause why greater visitation privileges should not be granted
immediately. The officials must then provide at least some rationale for
the limit, or the court will order a change, pending a trial on the petition.
Compare restraining order; summons.
SHOW UP a one-to-one confrontation between a suspect and a witness to a
crime. Although the term is frequently used interchangeably with
lineup, the two are distinguishable in that lineup refers to a group of
persons being shown to a witness.
SHRINKWRAP LICENSE see clickwrap license [SHRINKWRAP
LICENSE].
SIC Lat.: thus. Used to make clear that the quoted material contains a
grammatical mistake or spelling error in the original writing.
SICK PAY refers to compensation an employee receives while away from a
job due to illness or injury. In general, when an employee receives
payments as reimbursement for medical care or for permanent injury,
such payments constitute an exclusion from gross income. If an
employee receives wages or payments in lieu of wages under a
disability plan provided by the employer, of which payments are made
to the employee on account of permanent and total disability, a portion
of such payment is not subject to income taxes.
SIDE-BAR the area of the courtroom that is within the hearing of the judge
but out of the hearing of the jury and the witness. When court is in
session and the attorneys must discuss with the judge issues that are not
appropriate for the jury to hear, the attorneys and the judge will hold a
conference at side-bar. Such side-bar conferences are preserved by the
stenographer and appear in the transcript for purposes of appeal.
SIGHT DRAFT a bill of exchange for the immediate payment of money.
See demand note; draft [SIGHT DRAFT].
SIGNATURE a writing or other mark that is placed upon an instrument for
the purpose of authenticating it or giving it legal effect. Statutes define
signature differently in different contexts, such as in corporate
documents, wills, books, etc. For instance, under the Uniform
Commercial Code, a signature is made by use of any name, including
any trade or assumed name, upon an instrument, or by any word or
mark used in lieu of a written signature.
SILENT PARTNER an investor in a business enterprise who either does
not take an active role in the management of the business, or whose
identity is not revealed to third parties; a principal whose identity is not
disclosed by his or her agent. While the identity of a silent partner may
or may not be disclosed, the silent partner, nonetheless, participates in
the profits or loses of the enterprise. See principal [UNDISCLOSED
PRINCIPAL].
SILVER PLATTER DOCTRINE the doctrine, now discredited, that
allowed evidence seized by state officers in an illegal search and seizure
to be used against the defendant in a federal criminal trail. It was
subsequently declared unconstitutional.
SIMONY see barratry [SIMONY].
SIMPLE CONTRACT see sealed instrument.
SIMPLE NEGLIGENCE the failure to exercise ordinary care; to be
distinguished from gross negligence. See negligence.
SIMPLE TRUST see trust [SIMPLE TRUST].
SIMPLICITER simply, directly, summarily.
SIMULTANEOUS DEATH ACT a uniform state law passed in most
states providing for the distribution of property when distribution
depends upon the time of death of more than one person and it cannot
be determined that the persons died other than simultaneously. In cases
governed by the Act, the law presumes each person died before the
other, with the effect that one half of the property of each passes to the
estate of the other.
SINE DIE (se@’-na@ de@’-a@) Lat.: without day, without time. A legislative
body adjourns sine die when it does not set the next date of assembly.
SINE QUA NON (se@’-na@kwä no*n) Lat.: without which not. That without
which the thing cannot be, i.e., the essence of something. Compare
cause.
EXAMPLE: Jayla purchases a new refrigerator. She puts the old one on the
street to be carted away but does not remove the door or lock it shut. A
child is severely injured when he is trapped inside the refrigerator. The
sine qua non is Jayla’s failure to do something about the door, which
made the refrigerator an attractive nuisance.
SINKING FUND an accumulation, by a corporation or government body,
of money invested to repay a debt.
EXAMPLE: A university borrows money from a bank to build a library. In
its appeal to alumni, the school stresses that it wants to develop a
sinking fund to pay off the loan. It is hoped that the fund will generate
enough interest income so that the principal is never touched.
In government bodies, a sinking fund, whose sources are taxes,
imposts or duties, is appropriated toward payment of interest on a
public loan and for eventual payment of the principal.
S.I.P.C. see Securities Investor Protection Corporation [S.I.P.C.].
SISTERN (awkward) term for a female member of the United States
Supreme Court. Prior to the appointment of female Justices, the
reference brethren (brothers) was used.
SITUS the location or place of a thing. The situs of real property and of
tangible personal property is determined by its physical location. The
situs of intangible property, such as a debt or note, is more theoretical
and may depend upon the location of the debtor, creditor or other
variables. This determination frequently becomes one of jurisdiction,
that is, whether a particular court has the power to issue an order
affecting the rights or interests of the parties in such property, and
whether such an order can be enforced.
SIXTH AMENDMENT the amendment to the U.S. Constitution that
entitles the accused in a criminal trial the right to a speedy trial by an
impartial jury, to be informed of the charges against him or her, to be
confronted with witnesses against him or her, to have compulsory
process for obtaining witnesses in his or her favor, and to have effective
assistance of counsel.
Through the process of selective incorporation, each of these rights
has been applied to the states under the due process clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment. While these rights form the foundation of the
accused’s right to a fair trial, the accused has been accorded additional
rights, such as the right to conduct his or her own defense as necessary
to a fair trial under the due process clause.
SKIPTRACING the location of missing persons such as heirs, debtors,
spouses, or witnesses, frequently done by a specialized agency or
private investigator, often so service of process can be made.
SKYJACKING see hijacking.
SKY LAWS see blue sky laws; sunshine laws.
S.L. session or statute laws.
SLAMMING the deceptive practice of switching a person’s long-distance
telephone provider (or other public utility) without that person’s
knowledge or permission. The FCC will take action against slammers.
SLANDER to engage in defamation orally; spoken words that tend to
damage another’s reputation. If defamatory meaning is apparent on the
face of the statement, it is said to be SLANDEROUS PER SE. If the
defamatory meaning is not self-evident, but arises only from extrinsic
facts, the statement is SLANDEROUS PER QUOD. Compare libel.
SLANDER OF GOODS [TITLE] see bait and switch.
SLAPP SUIT Strategic Lawsuit Against Public Participation. Refers to
suits filed without merit against an activist or group to chill their actions
and draw effort away from their cause by forcing them to defend
themselves against the suit. The suits are filed to retaliate against critics
(claiming libel or slander or restraint of business for example) or to
intimidate the person(s) into silence. SLAPP-BACKS are lawsuits filed by a
defendant against the person(s) who filed the original SLAPP suit.
Many states have passed ANTI-SLAPP STATUTES providing for speedy
hearings and the possibility of recovering legal fees and punitive
damages.
SLIGHT CARE see care [SLIGHT CARE].
SLIGHT NEGLIGENCE see negligence [SLIGHT NEGLIGENCE].
SLIP OPINION see advance sheets.
SMALL CLAIMS COURT a court of limited jurisdiction, usually able
to adjudicate claims of $500 or less, depending on statute. Proceedings
are less formal than in other types of courts and parties usually represent
themselves.
SOCAGE in feudal England, a type of tenure founded upon certain and
designated services performed by the vassal for his lord, other than
military or knight’s service. Where the services were considered
honorable it was called FREE SOCAGE and where the services were of a
baser nature it was called VILLEIN SOCAGE. By statute, most all tenures
by knight-servants were converted into FREE AND COMMON SOCAGE. See
also homage.
SOCIAL GUEST see guest [SOCIAL GUEST].
SOCIAL SECURITY federal legislation known as the Social Security Act,
which provides a national program of contributory social insurance and
is administered by the Social Security Administration. Employees,
employers, and the self-employed pay involuntary contributions during
their years of employment in the form of a tax on payroll earnings,
known as F.I.C.A. Upon death, disability, or retirement the worker or
the worker’s family is provided monthly cash benefits. The Act also
provides assistance in the form of AID TO FAMILIES WITH DEPENDENT
CHILDREN [A.F.D.C.], which provides poor parents with funds for food and
shelter for their children and SUPPLEMENTARY SECURITY INCOME [S.S.I.],
which provides minimum monthly income to persons who are at a
certain retirement age, blind, or disabled and have income below a
specified level.
SOCRATIC METHOD type of instruction often used in law schools and
patterned after the Greek philosopher Socrates’ dialectical method of
hypothesis elimination. The process of layering questions and answers
is designed to stimulate critical thinking and analysis of the material.
SODOMY crime against nature, including bestiality, buggery (copulation
per anus) and, in many jurisdictions, other acts of unnatural sexual
intercourse as defined and proscribed by statute. Sodomy was a
common law felony in the United States.
SOFT COPY electronic copy or video display of a computer file or e-mail.
Compare hard copy (a physical document).
SOLDIER’S WILL see military will.
SOLEMNITY OF CONTRACT the concept that two persons are free and
entitled to make whatever contract or agreement they wish, and that if
the requisite formalities are observed and no defenses exist, their
contract should be respected and enforced.
SOLE PROPRIETORSHIP a business or financial venture that is carried
on by a single person and that is not a trust or corporation.
SOLICITATION an offense developed by later common law courts to
reach conduct whereby one incited another to commit a felony or
certain misdemeanors injurious to public welfare. If the actor agrees to
join the other in an offense, conspiracy can be established. Compare
aid and abet; pander.
SOLICITOR see barrister.
SOLICITOR GENERAL person appointed by the President to assist the
Attorney General in performing his or her duties. The Solicitor General
may attend to the interests of the United States in any court, and except
when otherwise authorized, only the Solicitor General or the Attorney
General shall conduct and argue suits and appeals in the Supreme Court
and suits, in which the United States is interested, in the court of claims.
SOLIDARITY STRIKE see boycott [SECONDARY BOYCOTT].
SOLVENCY 1. ability to pay all debts and just claims as they come due; 2.
term to signify that property is adequate to satisfy one’s obligations
when sold under execution. 3. In certain contexts, solvency is an excess
of assets over liabilities.
SOUND good physical condition; free from defects. See sane.
SOUND AND DISPOSING MIND AND MEMORY language often used in a will
as a declaration by the testator that he or she had testamentary
capacity when he or she executed the will.
SOUND BODY free from disease or infirmity.
SOUND MIND able to know and understand the nature of one’s acts;
synonymous with testamentary capacity.
SOUNDS IN has a connection with. Thus, though a party to a lawsuit has
pleaded damages in tort, it may be said that the action nevertheless
sounds in contract if the elements of the offense charged appear to
constitute a contract, rather than a tort, action.
SOVEREIGN that which is preeminent among all others; the King; the
State.
EXAMPLE: A state wants to build a highway that requires the use of
private property. Negotiations with the property owners fail to persuade
them to sell to the state. The state can then use its sovereign power of
eminent domain over all property within the state to take private
property and put it to public use upon payment of just compensation.
SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY immunity precluding suit against the
sovereign (government) without the sovereign’s consent when the
sovereign is engaged in a government function. Compare Federal Tort
Claims Act.
SPACE ARBITRAGE see arbitrage [SPACE ARBITRAGE].
SPADING cite checking; the use of an electronic or printed citator to check
the history or current status of a case or piece of legislation. One may
also look up parallel citations by this method. Shepard’s Citations is
such a well known citator that it has led to the term “SHEPARDIZING” to
commonly describe the process of tracing the history of decisions which
follow, distinguish, or overrule the case or legislation being checked.
SPAM unsolicited bulk e-mail [UBE] messages providing commercial
advertising or attempting scams at low cost to the sender. PHISHING email directing the recipient to other sites (via a hyperlink) or to a phone
number, and requesting personal information in order to commit identity
theft. Such an e-mail may appear to come from a regularly visited site
or legitimate company. SPEAR PHISHING e-mail appearing to come from
the recipient’s employer, human resources, or information technology
office. The Federal Trade Commission handles charges against those
who produce and distribute such mass disruptions, particularly where
they contain fraudulent business schemes or offensive messages.
SPECIAL APPEARANCE see appearance [SPECIAL APPEARANCE].
SPECIAL ASSUMPSIT see assumpsit [SPECIAL ASSUMPSIT].
SPECIAL CONTRACT see sealed instrument; specialty.
SPECIAL COURT-MARTIAL see court-martial; military law [COURTMARTIAL].
SPECIAL DAMAGES see damages [CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES].
SPECIAL DEMURRER see demurrer [SPECIAL DEMURRER].
SPECIAL INDORSEMENT see indorsement [SPECIAL INDORSEMENT].
SPECIAL JURISDICTION see jurisdiction [LIMITED [SPECIAL]
JURISDICTION]; limited jurisdiction.
SPECIAL LEGISLATION acts of the legislature for the benefit of a
certain individual or group, as opposed to general legislation enacted for
the general population. Special laws may be constitutional if there is a
rational basis for limiting application of the statute to the special group,
such as small municipalities.
EXAMPLE: A state legislature passes a law requiring all municipalities to
provide sewage systems. Because of the peculiarities of the soil in one
municipality, special legislation is passed postponing the requirements
until appropriate technology can be developed.
SPECIAL MASTER see master [master in chancery; special master].
SPECIAL POWER OF APPOINTMENT see power of appointment
[SPECIAL POWER].
SPECIAL PROSECUTOR see prosecutor [SPECIAL PROSECUTOR].
SPECIAL TRAVERSE see traverse [SPECIAL TRAVERSE].
SPECIALTY common law category of formal contracts that were valid
without consideration. It is synonymous with SPECIAL CONTRACT. The
usual form of the formal contract that was called a specialty was an
instrument under seal. Other examples include recognizances,
negotiable instruments and documents, and letters of credit. See
sealed instrument.
SPECIE money with intrinsic value, e.g., gold and silver coins.
SPECIFIC BEQUEST see bequest [SPECIFIC BEQUEST].
SPECIFIC DENIAL see denial [SPECIFIC DENIAL].
SPECIFIC INTENT see intent [SPECIFIC INTENT].
SPECIFIC LEGACY see legacy [SPECIFIC LEGACY].
SPECIFIC MENS REA see mens rea [SPECIFIC MENS REA].
SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE an equitable remedy available to an
aggrieved party when remedy at law is inadequate. A decree of specific
performance requires the party guilty of BREACH OF CONTRACT (see
breach) to complete performance of his or her obligations under the
contract on pain of punishment for contempt. Money damages, in
contrast, are enforceable only by a judgment against property. Specific
performance is available only where the subject matter of the contract
is unique such as a particular parcel of real property or a rare painting,
or in other unusual circumstances.
SPECIFIC RELIEF see specific performance.
SPECIFIC WARRANTY DEED see warranty deed [SPECIFIC
WARRANTY DEED].
SPECULATION purchase of property with the expectation of obtaining a
quick profit as a result of price change.
SPEECH, FREEDOM OF see freedom [FREEDOM OF SPEECH].
SPEECH OR DEBATE CLAUSE constitutional provision that protects
members of Congress from prosecution “for any speech or debate in
either House.” The clause was designed to assure Congress wide
freedom of speech, debate, and deliberation without intimidation or
threats from any other branch of government, and to protect members of
Congress against prosecutions that directly impinge upon or threaten the
legislative process.
SPEED see controlled substances.
SPEED, DELIBERATE see deliberate speed.
SPEEDY TRIAL constitutional guarantee that anyone accused of a crime
is entitled to a trial conducted according to prevailing rules, regulations
and proceedings of law, free from arbitrary, vexatious or oppressive
delays.
SPENDING POWER in the U.S. Constitution the power of Congress to
spend money in order to provide for the general welfare of the United
States. At least since 1936, this power has been recognized not only to
apply to purposes other than those specifically enumerated in Article I
of the Constitution, but to include purposes such as Social Security,
desegregation, and environmental control.
SPENDTHRIFT TRUST a trust to provide a fund for maintenance of a
beneficiary that is so restricted that it is secure against the beneficiary’s
improvidence, and beyond the reach of his creditors.
EXAMPLE: Ross is well-known for his ability to spend large sums of
money quickly and foolishly. Fearful that his habits may one day leave
him without enough to live on, his mother creates a spendthrift trust
with Ross as beneficiary. The trust is restricted so that he receives only
income and cannot invade the principal except with special permission.
SPLIT GIFT see gift [SPLIT GIFT].
SPLIT SENTENCE see probation [SPLIT SENTENCE].
SPLITTING A CAUSE OF ACTION impermissible practice of bringing
an action for only part of the cause of action in one suit, and initiating
another suit for another part. Under the policy against splitting of causes
of action, the law mandates that all damages accruing to one as a result
of a single wrongful act be claimed in one action or not at all.
EXAMPLE: Matt develops a new product and obtains a patent for it. Two
months later, one of Matt’s assistants goes to work for a company that
introduces the exact same product. Matt sues the company but splits his
cause of action by filing one suit for copyright infringement and another
for profits derived from the sale of his product. The court does not
permit this and forces Matt to combine both suits at the same time in
one action.
Compare multiplicity of suits; joinder; misjoinder.
SPOILATION (OF RECORDS) the hiding or destruction of litigation
evidence. Remedies include the “spoilation inference” which tells the
fact finder that an adverse inference may be drawn that the evidence
concealed would have been harmful to the case of the person who
concealed it; discovery sanctions; or a separate tort action. Some
jurisdictions feel the tort of FRAUDULENT CONCEALMENT is sufficient to
deal with issues of spoilation. Fraudulent concealment has the following
elements (1) the defendant had a legal obligation to disclose evidence in
connection with existing or pending litigation; (2) the evidence was
material to the litigation; (3) the plaintiff could not have reasonably
obtained access by other means; (4) the defendant intentionally
withheld, altered, or destroyed the evidence with the purpose of
disrupting the litigation; and (5) the plaintiff was damaged in the
underlying litigation by having to rely on an evidential record that did
not contain the evidence the defendant concealed. See also
concealment. Spoilation also refers to the violent seizure of real or
personal property.
SPOOFING see spam [PHISHING].
SPOT ZONING see zoning [SPOT ZONING].
SPOUSAL DISQUALIFICATION common law rule that disqualified the
husband or wife from testifying either for or against the spouse in any
civil or criminal case. Today, statutes generally consider a husband or
wife fully competent to testify either for or against a spouse, subject to
the limitations of the marital communications privilege. The witnessspouse alone has a privilege to refuse to testify adversely. The witness
may be neither compelled to testify nor foreclosed from testifying.
SPRINGING INTEREST see interest [SPRINGING INTEREST].
SPRINGING USE see use. See also interest [EXECUTORY INTEREST].
SQUEEZE-OUT in corporate law, any transaction engaged in by the
parties in control of a corporation for the purpose of eliminating
minority shareholders. The use of corporate control vested in the
statutory majority of shareholders or the board of directors to eliminate
minority shareholders from the enterprise or to reduce to relative
insignificance their voting power or claims on corporate assets.
Furthermore, it implies a purpose to force upon the minority shareholder
a change that is not incident to any other business goal of the
corporation. Although the form of such freeze-out transaction may vary
and is not confined to merger or consolidation, the policy considerations
are generally the same.
SSI see Social Security [SUPPLEMENTARY SECURITY INCOME].
SSN Social Security number. See Social Security.
STAKEHOLDER a third party chosen by two or more persons to keep in
deposit property whose title is in dispute, and to deliver the property to
the one who establishes his right to it.
STALKING persistent, distressing, or threatening behavior consisting of at
least two elements: the actor must repeatedly follow the victim and must
engage in conduct that annoys or alarms the victim and serves no
legitimate purpose. Constitutionally protected activities such as
picketing are not intended to be covered by such statutes. Compare the
charge of harassment, which is generally considered less serious than
stalking.
STANDARD DEDUCTIONS see deductions [STANDARD DEDUCTIONS].
STANDARD OF CARE the uniform standard of behavior upon which the
theory of negligence is based. The standard of care requires the actor to
do what the “reasonable person of ordinary prudence” would do in the
actor’s place. If the actor’s conduct falls below the standard that a
reasonable person would conform to under like circumstances, the actor
may be liable for injuries or damages resulting from his or her conduct.
STANDING the legal right to challenge in a judicial forum the conduct of
another. In the federal system, litigants must satisfy constitutional
standing requirements in order to create a legitimate case or
controversy within the meaning of Article III of the Constitution. In
construing this language, courts have held that the gist of the question of
standing is whether the party seeking relief has alleged a personal stake
in the outcome of the controversy so as to insure that real, rather than
remote or possible, adverseness exists to sharpen the presentation of
issues.
EXAMPLE: Payne, a resident of one state, files a suit claiming that another
state prevents its own citizens from voting. Since Payne is not affected
by the fact that citizens of another state may not be getting the
opportunity to vote, he has no standing to bring this challenge. There
are procedures whereby a court has the discretionary power to allow
Payne to participate in a suit if someone files it who does have standing.
Payne might also have standing in the suit first referred to if the
challenged state action adversely impacts on a national election that
affects Payne.
STANDING MUTE in a criminal trial, refusing to plead; today equivalent
to a plea of not guilty. Compare self-incrimination, privilege against.
STANDING ORDER see order [STANDING ORDER].
STAR CHAMBER an ancient court of England that received its name
because the ceiling was covered with stars. It sat with no jury and could
administer any penalty but death. The Star Chamber was abolished
when its jurisdiction was expanded to such an extent that it became too
onerous for the people of England. The abuses of the Star Chamber
were a principal reason for the incorporation in the federal consitution
of the privilege against self-incrimination.
STARE DECISIS (stä’-ra@ de*-sῑ’-sĭs) Lat.: to stand by that which was
decided. Rule by which common law courts are reluctant to interfere
with principles announced in former decisions and therefore rely upon
judicial precedent as a compelling guide to decision of cases raising
issues similar to those in previous cases.
EXAMPLE: A state supreme court rules that a person’s privacy interests
demand court protection of telephone toll records from police
investigations. Several years later, the issue is brought back to the court.
The prosecutor claims that other states allow the records to be used
without interference in privacy and that other privacy protections can be
employed if necessary. Even if some new members of the court agree
with the prosecutor, the court most likely will apply stare decisis and
abide by the previous decision.
STAT. abbreviation for statute; also, informal for immediately.
STATE 1. an institution. An organized community of persons living within
territorial limits. Pertaining to government, a nation, or sovereignty
generally. Also, one of the parts of a nation, such as a state of the United
States. The term state in the United States of America includes the 48
continental states and Alaska and Hawaii. Puerto Rico, Guam, and the
Virgin Islands of the United States are examples of U.S. Territories,
while the term OUTLYING POSSESSIONS of the United States means only
American Samoa and Swains Island. 2. character; 3. condition, status, or
situation; 4. circumstance; 5. display, say, or declare.
STATE ACTION generally, term used to describe claims arising under the
due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and the Civil Rights
Act for which a private party is seeking damages or other proper
remedy because the state has violated that party’s civil rights. See color
of law.
STATEMENT a declaration of fact; an allegation by a witness. See also
prior inconsistent statement; registration statement.
CLOSING STATEMENT in litigation, a summation made by the attorney, at
the end of the case, which sets forth that client’s case. In real estate law,
a document prepared in the closing of a sale of real estate that
summarizes the transaction and sets forth its financial terms.
OPENING STATEMENT in litigation, a statement made by the attorney for
each party after the jury has been selected and before any evidence has
been presented. A defendant may reserve an opening statement until
after the conclusion of the plaintiff’s case. An opening statement
outlines for the jury the evidence that each party intends to present and
informs the jury of the party’s theory of the case.
STATE OF MIND one’s mental processes. See hearsay rule [state of mind
exception]; mens rea.
STATE OR MUNICIPAL BONDS state or municipal bonds are debt
instruments issued by state or local governments. The interest paid or
accrued on such bonds is generally an exclusion from gross income,
and thus not subject to income tax.
STATE REMEDIES see exhaustion of remedies [EXHAUSTION OF STATE
REMEDIES].
STATE’S ATTORNEY see prosecutor.
STATE SECRETS information which the federal government withholds in
court proceedings for national security reasons. It is a common law rule
of evidence not codified in any statute. Congress is considering
procedures and standards for resolving claims of state secret privilege.
STATE [STATE-SPONSORED] TERRORISM see terrorism [STATE
[STATE-SPONSORED] TERRORISM].
STATU QUO see in statu quo.
STATUS CRIME an offense where there is no wrongful deed that would
render the actor criminally liable if combined with mens rea. The
imposition of any punishment for such an offense violates the cruel and
unusual punishment prohibition of the Eighth Amendment. For
example, although one may be convicted for the use of drugs one may
not be convicted for the mere status of addiction to drugs. See also
vagrancy.
STATUS QUO (sta*’-tu*s kwo@) Lat.: the positions or conditions that exist.
STATUS QUO ANTE the situation that existed at the inception of a
contract.
See injunction; rescission; restraining order.
STATUTE an act of the legislature, adopted under its constitutional
authority, by prescribed means and in certain form, so that it becomes
the law governing conduct within its scope. Statutes are enacted to
prescribe conduct, define crimes, create inferior government bodies,
appropriate public monies, and in general to promote the public welfare.
Compare common law; judge-made law; ordinance; police power.
See declaratory statutes; severable statute.
STATUTE OF DESCENT AND DISTRIBUTION see descent and
distribution [STATUTE OF DESCENT AND DISTRIBUTION].
STATUTE OF FRAUDS statutory requirement that certain kinds of
contracts be in writing to be enforceable. Contracts to answer to a
creditor for the debt of another, contracts made in consideration of
marriage, contracts for the sale of land or affecting any interest in land
and contracts not to be performed within one year from their making
normally must be evidenced by a written memorandum and be signed
by the party sought to be bound by the contract.
STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS any law that fixes the time within which
parties must take judicial action to enforce rights or else be thereafter
barred from enforcing them. Equity proceedings are governed by an
independent doctrine called laches.
The enactment of such laws and invocation of the doctrine of laches
to bar suits in equity derives from the belief that there is a point beyond
which a prospective defendant should no longer worry about a future
possibility of an action against him or her, that the law disfavors “stale
evidence,” and that no one should be able to “sit on his (her) rights” for
an unreasonable time without forfeiting claims.
STATUTE OF QUIA EMPTORES see Quia Emportes, Statute of.
STATUTE OF REPOSE see repose [STATUTE OF REPOSE].
STATUTE OF USES an English statute, enacted in 1536, to prevent
separation of legal and EQUITABLE ESTATES (see estate) in land, a
separation that arose whenever a use was created at common law. The
purpose was to unite all legal and equitable estates in the beneficiary
(the holder of the equitable estate) and to strip the trustee (the holder of
the legal title) of all interest.
STATUTE OF WILLS an early English statute prescribing conditions
necessary for valid disposition through a will. Today the term is used
broadly to refer to the statutory provisions of a particular jurisdiction
relating to requirements for valid testamentary dispositions.
STATUTE, TITLE OF A see title [TITLE (OF A STATUTE)].
STATUTORY ARSON see arson [STATUTORY ARSON].
STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION the process by which one determines
the meaning of statutes by drawing conclusions with respect to matters
that lie beyond the direct expression of the text from elements known
and given in the text. The meaning of a law may be ascertained from
examining extraneous connected circumstances, laws, writings or
legislative history bearing on the same or connected matter, and seeking
therefrom the probable aim and purpose of the statute. The courts have
developed principles of statutory construction, such as ejusdem generis
and expressio unius est exclusio alterius. See liberal construction;
severable statute [SEVERABILITY CLAUSE]; strict construction.
STATUTORY EXCEPTIONS see exceptions [STATUTORY EXCEPTIONS].
STATUTORY LAW the law created by legislatively enacted statutes.
Compare common law.
STATUTORY OFFENSE those crimes created by statutes and not by
common law; offenses malum prohibitum. See regulatory offense.
STATUTORY RAPE see carnal knowledge; rape [STATUTORY RAPE].
STAY a halt in a judicial proceeding where, by its order, the court will not
take further action until the occurrence of some event.
STAY OF EXECUTION process whereby a judgment is precluded from
being executed for a specific period.
EXAMPLE: An apartment dweller is found in default under his lease. He
seeks a stay of execution of the eviction order until he can make new
living arrangements. A stay may be granted, but not for an excessively
long time.
STEP TRANSACTION see transaction [STEP TRANSACTION].
STEP-UP BASIS see basis [STEP-UP BASIS].
STIMULANTS see controlled substances [STIMULANTS].
STIPULATION an agreement or concession made by parties in a judicial
proceeding or by their attorneys, relating to a matter before the court.
EXAMPLE: Two parties in a contractual dispute agree as to most of the
facts except those occurring immediately prior to the breach of contract.
To avoid unnecessary delays in proving facts that the parties agree on,
they enter a stipulation with the court as to those facts. If one of those
facts is actually a legal conclusion based on the facts, the court will not
accept that part of the stipulation.
STIRPES see per stirpes.
STOCK 1. a merchant’s inventory; 2. the capital of a corporation,
consisting of proceeds from the sale of shares and evidenced by the total
number of shares issued; 3. the number of shares owned by an
individual shareholder and the proportionate equity interest in the
corporation represented thereby. See securities.
BONUS STOCK see bonus stock.
COMMON STOCK see common stock.
NO-PAR STOCK see no-par [nonpar] stock.
PREFERRED STOCK see preferred stock.
STOCKBROKER see broker or registered representative.
STOCK CERTIFICATE written instrument evidencing a share in the
ownership of a corporation.
STOCK CLEARING a so-called “back office” function in the securities
trade that involves physical delivery of securities and money payments
between buyers and sellers.
STOCK CORPORATION see nonstock corporation.
STOCK DIVIDEND see dividend [STOCK DIVIDEND].
STOCK EXCHANGE a place where the business of buying and selling
securities is transacted. See New York Stock Exchange; regional
stock exchange.
STOCKHOLDER see dummy [DUMMY SHAREHOLDER]; security;
shareholder.
STOCKHOLDERS’ DERIVATIVE ACTION see derivative action.
EXAMPLE: The shareholders of a corporation believe that the corporation
is not pressing a debt owed to it by another company. The shareholders
bring a stockholders’ derivative action to force the officers to take steps
against the other company to secure payment of the debt.
STOCK, INVESTMENT see restricted securities [INVESTMENT STOCK].
STOCK ISSUE see issue [STOCK ISSUE].
STOCK, LETTER see restricted securities [LETTER STOCK].
STOCK MARKET an organized market, such as a stock exchange or an
over-the-counter market, where stocks and bonds are actively traded.
See also brokers; dealers; securities.
STOCK OPTION the granting to an individual of the right to purchase a
corporate stock at some future date at a price specified at the time the
option is given rather than at the time the stock is obtained. The option
may be purchased or sold, as in a CALL OPTION, or may be granted to an
individual by the company as is an EMPLOYEE STOCK OPTION. The
option will always involve a specified number of shares, state a time
period within which it may be exercised and state a price to be paid
upon exercise. A PUT OPTION is the reverse of a call option in that the
holder has a right to compel the seller of the option to purchase his
shares at a fixed price during a set time period for a predetermined price
per share.
EXAMPLE: Santiago acquires the right to buy x number of shares of
corporate stock in two months at $20 a share. The price of the stock
option depends on the price of the stock at the time the option is
purchased. Santiago hopes that the stock will be worth over $20 in two
months. If it is worth $25 at that time, he may decide to exercise his
option to purchase at $20 and then choose to sell the stock immediately
at a profit for its market value of $25. If it is worth less than $20 in two
months, however, Santiago will probably not exercise his option and
will only lose whatever he paid for the option. At any time before
expiration, Santiago can sell the option for its then market value.
STOCK RIGHTS see subscription rights.
STOCK SPLIT a dividing up of the outstanding shares of the corporation
into a greater number of units without disturbing the stockholder’s
original proportional participating interest in the corporation. Stock split
involves no change in the capital account, while a stock dividend
involves a transfer of accumulated earnings to the capital account. In the
event of a corporate stock split, no change is made in any corporate
accounts, and although more shares are issued to present holders by
reducing par (or stated) value, there is no distribution in any sense.
STOLEN PROPERTY see receiving stolen property.
STOP AND FRISK in reference to police conduct on the street, a limited
search for weapons confined to outer clothing.
EXAMPLE: A policeman observes two men walk in front of a jewelry
store several times and discuss what they see after each trip. The
policeman is permitted to stop the men and question them until the
purpose of their activity is sufficiently explained. He can frisk them if
he sees a bulge that appears to be a weapon or if he otherwise has a
reasonable belief that one of them possesses a weapon. To do anything
beyond this “stop and frisk” requires a more concrete belief that the pair
will commit or have committed a crime.
Compare search and seizure.
STOWAWAY for immigration purposes, any alien who obtains
transportation without the consent of the owner, charterer, master, or
person in command of any vessel or aircraft through concealment
aboard such vessel or aircraft.
STRADDLE in the securities trade, refers to an option position in which a
holder has both a put (contract to sell) and a call (contract to buy) on
the same stock or commodity at the same or nearly the same exercise
price. Profit is gained if the optioned stock has a large price movement
in either direction. If the price remains stable, a loss results. Thus,
straddles are of interest when the underlying stock or commodity is very
volatile, but the direction of the next move is uncertain. See hedging.
STRAIGHT BILL OF LADING see bill of lading [STRAIGHT BILL OF
LADING].
STRAIGHT-LINE METHOD see depreciation [STRAIGHT-LINE
DEPRECIATION].
STRAW MAN [PERSON] 1. a colloquial expression designating
arguments in briefs or opinions created solely for the purpose of
refuting them. Such arguments are like straw men because they are, by
nature, insubstantial.
2. In commercial and property contexts, the term may be used when a
transfer is made to a third party, the straw man, simply to retransfer to
the transferror or to transfer to another in order to accomplish some
purpose not otherwise permitted.
STREET NAME refers to securities held in the name of a broker or the
broker’s nominee instead of the name of the owner. This is required
when securities are purchased on margin. Many cash buyers leave their
securities with their broker, who normally holds them in street name,
although arrangements can be made to hold the securities as custodian
in the customer’s name.
STRICT CONSTRUCTION 1. adherence to the literal meaning of the
words in statutes or contracts; 2. an interpretation that confines a
statute or instrument to subjects or applications obviously within its
terms or purposes.
STRICT LIABILITY in tort and criminal law, liability without a showing
of fault, or the need to show fault. See ultrahazardous activity.
EXAMPLE: Adrienne harbors wild animals on her estate. A child
accidentally enters the estate and is harmed by one of these animals.
Adrienne will usually be held strictly liable for the injury regardless of
the fact that the child did not belong there or that the child scared the
animal. Society imposes that cost on Adrienne merely for keeping the
animals.
STRICT SCRUTINY a test to determine the constitutional validity of a
statute that creates a category of persons, including classifications based
upon nationality or race. Under this test, if a grouping scheme affects
fundamental rights—such as the right to vote—it requires a showing
that the classification is necessary to, and the least intrusive means of
achieving, a compelling state interest.
STRIKE a concerted action or combination effort by a group designed to
exert pressure on an individual or entity to accede to certain demands.
For instance, the mass refusal to work overtime by a group of
employees constitutes a strike. The right to strike by employees is
generally governed by the National Labor Relations Act. However,
the use of the term strike is not limited to the labor context. For
instance, the refusal of a group of tenants to pay rent until the landlord
makes improvements in the rented property is commonly referred to as
a RENT STRIKE. See no strike clause.
STRIKES, THREE see three strikes.
STRIKE SUIT a suit brought primarily for its nuisance value by a small
shareholder whose interest in the corporation is insignificant. Knowing
that the cost of defending such a suit is high, the shareholder sues
hoping for a private settlement. These suits are also called BLACKMAIL
SUITS and HOLDUP SUITS. Compare stockholders’ derivative action.
SUA SPONTE (su@’-aW spo*n’-ta@) Lat.: of itself or of one’s self. Without
being prompted; refers especially to a court’s acting of its own volition
(on its own motion), without a motion being made by either of the
adverse parties.
EXAMPLE: A party files a lawsuit and the opponent replies, so that both
parties are prepared to litigate the issue. If the judge realizes for some
reason that he has no jurisdiction over the case, he will on his own
initiative dismiss the case. His action is taken sua sponte.
SUBCHAPTER S CORPORATION see corporation [SUBCHAPTER S].
SUBCONTRACTOR one to whom a principal (general) contractor or
other subcontractor sublets part or all of a contract.
SUBDIVISION any reduction in size of a parcel or tract of land by division
into two or more smaller parcels. See zoning.
SUBINFEUDATION the process that developed under feudal law
whereby the grantee of an estate in land from his lord granted a smaller
estate in the same land to another. In 1066, William the Conqueror
claimed all the land of England for the crown. Subsequently, he granted
land to barons for their use in exchange for services, but retained
ultimate ownership, this grant process being called infeudation. Such
barons held land in capite. Subinfeudation was the process by which
barons further divided the land by making grants to knights in return for
knight services, and the term also includes all subsequent grants and
subdivisions by knights and their grantees. Owners under
subinfeudation held land “in service” to their grantor and owed nothing
directly to the king.
Subinfeudation was made illegal by the statute of Quia Emptores
and was replaced by the modern concept of alienation. See servitudes.
SUBJACENT SUPPORT the support of the surface by the underlying
strata of the earth. Compare lateral support.
SUBJECT MATTER the thing in dispute; the nature of the cause of
action; the real issue of fact or law presented for trial; also, the object
of a contract.
SUBJECT MATTER JURISDICTION see jurisdiction [SUBJECT
MATTER JURISDICTION].
SUBJECT TO MORTGAGE see mortgage [SUBJECT TO MORTGAGE].
SUBJECT TO OPEN describes the future interests of a class of persons
in real property or a trust when the number of persons who could
comprise the class may increase or decrease. For example, A, fee owner,
conveys to B for life, remainder to B’s children. At the time of the grant,
B has a child C. C has a vested remainder subject to open to let in later
born children. Thereafter, children D and E are born to B and upon their
births the remainder opens and vests in C, D, and E as co-tenants. The
term is also known as SUBJECT TO PARTIAL DEFEASANCE.
SUB JUDICE (su*b ju@’-dĭ-sa@) Lat.: under a court. Before a court or judge
for consideration.
EXAMPLE: Two attorneys are arguing their respective positions before a
judge. One attempts to prove his point by using related examples. The
other, seeking to weaken his opponent’s tactic, reminds the judge that
the facts of the case sub judice are sufficiently different from the
examples to warrant a different outcome.
SUBLEASE a transaction whereby a tenant (one who has leased premises
from the owner, or landlord) grants to another an interest less than his
or her own in the leased premises. Compare assignment [ASSIGNMENT
OF A LEASE].
EXAMPLE: Priya has two years remaining on her rental agreement when
she marries her boyfriend and moves into his apartment. Except in rare
circumstances, Priya will be able to sublease her apartment to someone
else. But unless the landlord makes a different arrangement, Priya is still
responsible for seeing that rent is paid each month.
SUBLET to make a sublease.
SUBMIT to yield to the will of another. In mediation procedures,
committing to discretion of another or presenting for determination.
SUB MODO (su*b mo@’-do@) Lat.: under a qualification. Subject to a
condition.
SUB NOMINE (su*b no@’-me@-na@) Lat.: under the name; often abbreviated
sub nom. Indicates that the title of a case has been altered after the
beginning of the proceedings.
SUBORDINATION establishment of priority of one claim or debt over
another. A SUBORDINATION AGREEMENT is one in which a creditor
agrees in a contract that claims of other creditors must be fully paid
before there is any payment to the subordinated creditor.
EXAMPLE: A company wants to borrow money from a lender, but it runs
into difficulty because of two outstanding debts, both of which are owed
to company directors. In order to obtain the money, the directors sign a
subordination agreement, which provides that the lender will be fully
repaid before the directors receive any money toward their loans.
In real estate law, subordination refers to the establishment of priority
between different existing interests, claims, liens and encumbrances on
the same parcel of land.
SUBORNATION OF PERJURY a crime consisting of encouraging and
persuading another to make a false oath. See false swearing.
SUBPOENA (su*-pe@’-naW) Lat.: under penalty. A writ issued under authority
of a court to compel the appearance of a witness at a judicial
proceeding; disobedience may be punishable as contempt of court.
SUBPOENA AD TESTIFICANDUM (äd te*s-tĭ-fĭ-kän’-du@m) subpoena to
testify. Technical name for the ordinary subpoena.
SUBPOENA DUCES TECUM (du@’-che*s ta@’-ku@m) under penalty you shall
bring it with you. Type of subpoena issued by a court at the request of
one of the parties to a suit. A witness having under his or her control
documents relevant to the controversy is enjoined to bring such items to
court during the trial or at the deposition.
EXAMPLE: Several years ago, Wynn was a marketing consultant to a large
firm. The firm is being sued by a company that claims the firm gave it
false information. Wynn is not personally being sued, but he is issued a
subpoena duces tecum to testify at the trial and bring with him any
papers relevant to the firm’s relationship with the company.
SUBPRIME MORTGAGE see mortgage [SUBPRIME MORTGAGE].
SUBPRIME MORTGAGE CRISIS see mortgage [SUBPRIME MORTGAGE
CRISIS].
SUBROGATION the substitution of another person, the subrogee, in the
place of the creditor, to whose rights to the debt the other person
succeeds.
Subrogation typically arises when an insurance company pays its
insured under the provisions of an insurance policy; in that event the
company is subrogated to the cause of action of its insured against the
one responsible for the damage for which the insurance company has
paid.
EXAMPLE: While making a delivery, a home fuel oil company negligently
performs its task and a home burns down as a result. If the home is
protected by fire insurance, the insurance company will pay for the
damages. The homeowner’s claim against the oil company is then
subrogated to the insurance company.
SUBROGEE one who, by subrogation, succeeds to the legal rights or
claims of another.
SUBROGOR one whose legal rights or claims are acquired by another
through subrogation.
SUB ROSA literally “under the rose”; secretly, covertly, privately.
SUBSCRIBER a person who has agreed to take and pay for the original
unissued shares of a corporation.
SUBSCRIPTION 1. affixing a signature to a document. 2. purchase made
for a specified period of time, such as a monthly delivery or a purchase
for a series of events. 3. in a securities context, see subscription rights.
SUBSCRIPTION RIGHTS the contractual right of an existing
shareholder to purchase additional shares of stock of the same kind as
that already held when and if new shares are issued by a corporation.
Also called STOCK RIGHTS. Compare stock option; warrant [STOCK
WARRANT].
SUBSEQUENT CONDITION see condition subsequent.
SUBSIDIARY an inferior portion or capacity; usually describes a
relationship between corporations.
SUBSIDIARY CORPORATION one in which another corporation owns a
majority of shares and thus has control. It has all normal elements of a
corporation (charter, bylaws, directors), but its stock is controlled by
another corporation known as the PARENT CORPORATION.
SUB SILENTIO (su*b sĭ-le*n’-she@-o@) Lat.: under silence; silently. When a
later opinion reaches a result contrary to what would appear to be
controlling authority, the later case, by necessary implication, overrules
sub silentio the prior holdings.
EXAMPLE: An early case holds that a homeowner has no obligation to
remove the snow in front of his or her house. A later case ruled upon by
a higher court then decides that the homeowner does have that
obligation. The later case does not make specific reference to the earlier
case. By necessary implication, the later case overrules sub silentio the
prior case.
SUBSTANTIAL CAPACITY TEST see insanity [SUBSTANTIAL CAPACITY
TEST].
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE see substantial performance
[compliance].
SUBSTANTIAL PERFORMANCE [COMPLIANCE] performance of a
contract that, while not full performance, is so nearly equivalent to what
was bargained for that it would be unreasonable to deny the one who
has promised to perform the full contract price, subject to the right of
the one who agreed to pay for that performance to recover whatever
damages may have been occasioned him or her by the promisor’s
failure to render full performance.
EXAMPLE: A student contracts to paint a neighbor’s house during the
summer. He has almost completed the task when he is overwhelmed by
the desire to spend the rest of the summer at the shore. The only part of
the house unpainted is the window moldings, which are the same color
as the house but lack a fresh coat. The student is entitled to payment
since there is substantial performance of the contract, but there will be
a slight reduction in the price because of the unfinished moldings.
Compare breach [BREACH OF CONTRACT].
SUBSTANTIAL PRESENCE TEST see alien [SUBSTANTIAL PRESENCE
TEST].
SUBSTANTIVE DUE PROCESS see due process of law.
SUBSTANTIVE LAW the positive law that creates, defines and regulates
the rights and duties of the parties and that may give rise to a cause of
action, as distinguished from adjective law that pertains to and
prescribes the practice and procedure or the legal machinery by which
the substantive law is determined or made effective.
SUBSTITUTED BASIS see basis [SUBSTITUTED BASIS].
SUBSTITUTED SERVICE see service [SUBSTITUTED SERVICE].
SUBSTITUTION putting in place of another thing, serving in lieu of
another. In respect to wills, the putting of one person in the place of
another so that he or she may, on failure of the original devisee or
legatee or after such person, have the benefit of the legacy, particularly,
the act of the testator in naming a second legatee who is to take the
legacy on failure of the original legatee or after such person.
SUBTENANT one who leases all or part of rented premises from the
original lessee for a term less than that held by the original lessee; the
original lessee becomes the sublessor. Most leases either prohibit
subletting or require the lessor’s permission in advance. The original
lessee remains responsible for the subtenant’s obligations to the lessor.
EXAMPLE: A supplier rents space in a warehouse but finds that he does
not need the full amount that he rented. He then leases part of the space
to a large retail discount store that needs some extra storage space. The
discount store, which is the subtenant, may pay rent to the supplier or to
the warehouse owner. The supplier, though, is still liable for the full rent
unless some other agreement with the warehouse owner is reached.
Compare assignment [ASSIGNMENT OF A LEASE].
SUCCESSION refers to the process by which the property of a decedent is
inherited through descent or by will. See hereditary succession;
inheritance; intestate succession.
SUCCESSIVE TERMS a series of terms where one term follows the term
immediately preceding it.
SUCCESSOR one who succeeds to the role, rights, duties or place of
another.
SUCCESSOR ADMINISTRATOR see letters of administration
[SUCCESSOR ADMINISTRATOR].
SUE OUT to apply for and obtain a writ or court order, as to sue out a writ
in chancery.
SUFFERANCE see tenancy [TENANCY AT SUFFERANCE [HOLDOVER
TENANCY]].
SUFFICIENT CONSIDERATION see consideration [SUFFICIENT
CONSIDERATION].
SUICIDE the voluntary and intentional killing of oneself.
EXAMPLE: Suzanne is very upset over the loss of a boyfriend, so she goes
out and drinks heavily. When she comes home, she decides to take some
aspirin in the hope that there will be no hangover in the morning.
Unfortunately, she never wakes up. Suzanne is not a victim of suicide
because she had no intention of killing herself.
SUICIDE, ASSISTED see euthanasia.
SUI GENERIS (su@’ e@je*n’-e*r-ĭs) Lat.: of its own kind; unique; in a class by
itself. See also ejusdem generis.
SUI JURIS (su@’-e*ju@r’-ĭs) Lat.: of his own right. Describes one who is no
longer dependent, e.g., one who has reached majority, or has been
removed from the care of a guardian. Compare emancipation;
incompetency.
SUIT any proceeding in a court of justice by which an individual pursues a
remedy that the law affords.
CLASS SUIT see class action.
[STOCKHOLDERS’] DERIVATIVE SUIT see stockholders’ derivative
action.
SUITOR a claimant; a litigant. A party to an action in a court of law.
SUM CERTAIN any amount that is fixed, settled, stated or exact. It may
refer to the value of a negotiable instrument, to a price stated in a
contract, or to a measure of damages. The sum must be ascertainable
at the time the instrument is made and computable solely from
examination of it.
EXAMPLE: A long-term contract includes a very technical formula for
determining the cost of wheat. The formula allows for fluctuations in
the market place, weather, demand and other factors. Although the price
can therefore vary each time a price is paid, the fact that there is a
formula means that the contract includes a sum certain.
SUMMARY COURT-MARTIAL see court-martial; military law
[COURT-MARTIAL].
SUMMARY JUDGMENT preverdict judgment of the court in response
to a motion by plaintiff or defendant, rendered when the court perceives
that only questions of law are in dispute, or that the court’s decision
must be the same regardless of which party’s version of the facts is
accepted. It is a device designed to effect a prompt disposition of
controversies on their merits without resort to a lengthy trial.
EXAMPLE: Dale erects a structure on his property that almost completely
blocks the sun from the pool area that his neighbor just built, and the
neighbor sues Dale to remove the structure. Dale and the neighbor agree
on that set of facts. The only question is whether Dale may do as he
wants, which in this instance is a question of law. Both parties,
therefore, seek a summary judgment supporting their respective
positions.
Compare directed verdict.
SUMMARY PROCEEDING a method by which the parties to a legal
controversy may achieve a more prompt disposition of their case by use
of simplified procedural rules, usually involving more limited
discovery or fact finding than is normally permitted in the particular
type of proceeding. Summary proceedings have been commonly used in
arbitration, bankruptcy, landlord-tenant and unlawful entry and
detainer cases.
SUMMATION [SUMMING UP] the final step in a trial, wherein each
party’s counsel reviews the evidence that has been presented and
attempts to show why its position should prevail; also known as
CLOSING ARGUMENTS. In a jury trial, this step immediately precedes a
judge’s instructions to a jury. The party with the burden of proof
always closes or sums up last. Therefore, in a civil case, the defendant
closes first and then the plaintiff follows. In criminal cases, the
procedure varies among jurisdictions. Federal rules of criminal
procedure provide that the prosecution closes first the defendant
following. In most cases, the prosecution is also afforded an opportunity
to rebut the defendant’s closing as well.
A prosecutor has the special burden to prove the state’s allegations
beyond a reasonable doubt. During summation a prosecutor must not:
comment on a defendant’s failure to testify, refer to evidence not in the
record, interject personal opinions concerning the veracity of witnesses,
appeal to a jury based on passion or prejudice rather than facts, or imply
that the prosecutor believes that the defendant is guilty of the crime
charged. In addition, a prosecutor cannot be argumentative in his or her
closing. It is as much the prosecutor’s duty to refrain from improper
methods calculated to produce a wrongful conviction as it is to use
every legitimate means to bring about a just one. Failure of the
prosecutor to comply with the above is referred to as PROSECUTORIAL
MISCONDUCT and may result in a mistrial. Still, the prosecutor is
entitled to a certain degree of latitude in summation, and his or her
closing must be viewed in the context of the entire trial rather than in
the abstract.
SUMMONS a mandate requiring the appearance of the defendant under
penalty of having judgment entered against him or her for failure to
appear. The object of the summons is to notify the defendant that he has
been sued.
EXAMPLE: Nico sues a landscaper for installing a defective sprinkler
system. His attorney prepares a summons notifying the landscaper of the
court action. The clerk of the court stamps the summons, and it is then
issued.
See process; service. Compare subpoena.
SUNDAY CLOSING LAWS any state or local laws that restrict activities
on Sunday, as for instance forbidding the sale of goods on Sunday.
BLUE LAWS any state or local laws that, for moral or religious purposes,
restrict activities on Sunday or that restrict certain activities all the time,
such as an ordinance prohibiting the operation of a movie theater in a
municipality. The name “blue laws” comes from the blue paper the laws
were written on.
SUNSHINE LAWS laws requiring that government agencies and
departments permit the public to attend their meetings. Often called
OPEN PUBLIC MEETING LAWS.
SUO NOMINE (su@’-o@no@’-me@-na@) Lat.: in his own name.
SUPERIOR COURT see inferior court [SUPERIOR COURT].
SUPER-PACS see political action committee [SUPER-PACS].
SUPERSEDEAS (su@-peWr-se@’-de@-aWs) Lat.: you shall forbear. A writ
commanding a “stay of proceedings.” The purpose of such a writ is to
maintain the status quo that existed before the entry of a judgment or
decree of the court below.
SUPERSEDING CAUSE see cause [SUPERSEDING CAUSE].
SUPERVENING CAUSE see cause [INTERVENING [SUPERVENING]
CAUSE].
SUPPLEMENTAL something added to cure a deficiency or otherwise
complete a document or act. Compare amendment.
SUPPLEMENTAL ACT that which supplies a deficiency, adds to or
completes, or extends that which is already in existence without
changing or nullifying the original; an act designed to improve an
existing statute by adding something thereto without changing the
original text.
SUPPLEMENTAL AFFIDAVIT a subsequent affidavit in addition to the
original one. Generally used to explain or correct the original affidavit,
but may also be used to set up a new and different defense.
SUPPLEMENTAL ANSWER an answer in addition to the original answer
that corrects, enhances, or explains the original one.
SUPPLEMENTAL BILL in equity, a bill in addition to the original bill, that
brings into controversy some matter that occurred after the original bill
was filed, or that corrects a defect in the original bill.
SUPPLEMENTAL CLAIM a filed claim seeking additional relief after the
filing of the original claim.
SUPPLEMENTAL PLEADING [COMPLAINT] see pleading [SUPPLEMENTAL
PLEADING].
SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDING a proceeding in an action against a
judgment debtor to discover property of the debtor subject to
execution and apply such property to the satisfaction of the judgment.
Such a proceeding is separate from the original action and is generally
governed by the rules of the court.
SUPPLEMENTARY SECURITY INCOME see Social Security
[SUPPLEMENTARY SECURITY INCOME].
SUPPORT see alimony. See lateral support; subjacent support.
SUPPRESS to effectively prevent; to restrain; to end by force. See
suppression of evidence.
SUPPRESSION OF EVIDENCE the refusal to produce evidence or to
allow evidence to be produced for use in litigation. Suppression of
evidence refers most commonly to the sanction in a criminal case for an
unreasonable search or seizure that violates a defendant’s
constitutional rights. In 1914, the U.S. Supreme Court held that illegally
seized evidence must be excluded from use in federal criminal trials. In
1961, the Court expanded the exclusionary rule to include state
criminal trials.
Suppression of evidence also refers either to a party’s refusal to
produce evidence or to interference by a party with the production of
evidence when another party seeks the evidence pursuant to the law. In
civil cases, the failure to produce evidence may constitute an admission
that the evidence is unfavorable to the party refusing to produce it.
SUPRA (su@’-praW) Lat.: above; before. In a written work, refers to a part
preceding that which is presently being read.
SUPREMACY CLAUSE popularized title for Article VI, Section 2 of the
United States Constitution, which is the main foundation of the federal
government’s power over the states, providing that the acts of the
federal government are operative as supreme law throughout the union.
EXAMPLE: The United States Supreme Court rules that no person can be
arrested in his or her home without an arrest warrant issued by a judge.
Regardless of the procedures the various states used before the Supreme
Court decision, the Supremacy Clause mandates that the Supreme
Court’s decision govern future police practice.
SUPREME COURT the highest appellate court in most jurisdictions and
in the federal court system. It is usually the appellate state court of last
resort, and in the absence of a federal question, its decisions cannot be
reviewed by other courts and must be respected. In some states this
court is an inferior court and not the court of last resort.
In the federal court system, the United States Supreme Court is
expressly provided for in the Constitution, which vests judicial power
in “one Supreme Court” and such inferior courts as Congress shall
establish. It consists of a Chief Justice and eight Associate Justices
appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the U.S.
Senate.
SUPREME COURT OF APPEALS West Virginia’s highest state court.
SUPREME COURT OF ERRORS Connecticut’s highest state court.
SUPREME JUDICIAL COURT Massachusetts’ and Maine’s highest
state courts.
SURCHARGE 1. an additional charge that has been omitted from an
account stated; 2. a penalty for failure to exercise common prudence
and common skill in the performance of a fiduciary’s duties.
3. SURTAX is a tax added to the normal tax, imposed on certain kinds
of income.
SURETY one who undertakes to pay money or perform other acts in the
event that his or her principal fails therein. See also indorsement.
EXAMPLE: A corporation wants to issue bonds so that it has sufficient
money to develop a new product. If the reputation of the corporation is
such that people are unwilling to buy the bonds without some guarantee,
the corporation will seek a surety who in fact guarantees payment of the
corporate bonds.
SURETY BOND see bond [SURETY BOND].
SURPLUS the remainder of a fund appropriated for a particular purpose. In
corporations, surplus denotes assets left after liabilities and debts,
including capital stock, have been deducted.
EARNED SURPLUS the portion of surplus derived from the net earnings,
gains or profits retained by a corporation rather than paid to
shareholders as dividends.
PAID-IN SURPLUS the portion of surplus derived from the sale, exchange
or issuance of capital stock at a price above the PAR VALUE (see par) of
the stock. Thus, the difference between par value and the actual price
received is the paid-in surplus. In the case of no-par stock, it is the
amount received that has been allocated to paid-in surplus. The term is
sometimes used interchangeably with capital surplus, although the latter
term is often used to denote the entire surplus of a corporation other
than its earned surplus. See also unearned surplus.
SURREBUTTER in common law pleading, a plaintiff’s answer to the
defendant’s rebuttal (rebutter).
SURREJOINDER in common law pleading, a plaintiff’s answer to the
defendant’s rejoinder.
SURRENDER the yielding or delivery of possession in response to a
demand. In property law denotes the yielding of the leasehold estate by
the lessee to the landlord, so that the TENANCY FOR YEARS (see tenancy)
merges in the reversion and no longer exists.
SURROGATE a judicial officer of limited jurisdiction, who administers
matters of probate and intestate succession and, in some cases,
adoptions.
EXAMPLE: After Malik’s death, his will is submitted to a surrogate, who
oversees the distribution of the estate. A question arises concerning a
fraudulent transfer of money outside the estate, giving rise to possible
criminal and civil liability. Since the surrogate is limited in what he can
rule upon, the question must be raised in a court that has broader
jurisdiction.
SURROGATE MOTHER one who bears a child for a person or a couple
unable to have children, usually for monetary compensation. The
surrogate mother often uses her own egg and is impregnated with the
semen of the future father, but she may have a fertilized egg from the
future parents implanted in her uterus. Upon the child’s birth, the
surrogate mother relinquishes all rights, duties, and responsibilities to
the child. Various states have adopted statutes specifically regulating
this relationship. Surrogate parenting contracts were previously held to
be illegal under laws prohibiting baby selling.
SURROGATE PARENT one who is not a child’s parent, but who stands
in the place of the parent and is charged with a parent’s rights, duties,
and responsibilities, either by virtue of voluntary assumption or court
appointment. See guardian; in loco parentis.
SURROGATE’S COURT see court [SURROGATE’S COURT].
SURTAX see surcharge [SURTAX].
SURVEILLANCE oversight or supervision. In criminal law, an
investigative process by which police gather evidence about crimes or
suspected crime through continued observation of persons or places.
Wiretapping, electronic observation, tailing or shadowing are examples
of this type of law enforcement procedure.
SURVIVAL STATUTE a statute that preserves for his or her estate a
decedent’s cause of action for infliction of pain and suffering and
related damages suffered up to the moment of death. Compare
wrongful death statute.
SURVIVORSHIP a right whereby a person becomes entitled to property
by reason of having survived another person who had an interest in it. It
is one of the elements of a JOINT TENANCY (see tenancy).
EXAMPLE: Morgan and Brandon own a house as tenants by the entirety.
When Morgan dies, Brandon acquires full ownership of the house by his
right of survivorship.
SUSPECT as a verb, it is to have a slight or even vague idea concerning,
but not necessarily involving knowledge or belief or likelihood;
ordinarily used in place of the word “believe.” As a noun, a person
reputed to be involved in crime; a broad term for anyone being
investigated by law enforcement authorities. If the individual is
formally charged with an offense, the reference is generally to a
defendant, rather than a suspect.
SUSPECT CLASSIFICATION see equal protection of the laws.
SUSPENDED SENTENCE see sentence [SUSPENDED SENTENCE].
SUSPENSION temporary interruption or cessation; abeyance.
SUSTAIN to support; to approve; to adequately maintain.
SWEARING, FALSE see false swearing.
SWEAT EQUITY the process of volunteering hours of labor in lieu of
financial contributions. A start-up company may provide ownership
shares of the company in exchange for the labor of employees at lowerthan-market salaries.
EXAMPLE: Saba and Colin worked countless hours painting numerous
homes for Habitat for Humanity. Their sweat equity allowed them to
receive a home built with the labor provided by others working for the
organization. They then make interest-free mortgage payments into a
fund providing capital for building additional homes.
SWEEPSTAKES see lottery [SWEEPSTAKES].
SWITCH see bait and switch.
SYLLABUS a headnote preceding a reported case and summarizing the
principles of law established in that case. Under the practice of the
United States Supreme Court, the headnotes are prepared for the
convenience of readers by the Reporter of Decisions; as such, the
syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court.
SYMBOLIC DELIVERY see delivery [SYMBOLIC DELIVERY].
SYMBOLIC SPEECH conduct or activity expressing an idea or emotion
without the use of words. Some forms of speech, such as flag burning or
the wearing of black armbands to protest war have been held to be
protected under the First Amendment; however, other forms, such as
the burning of draft cards have not been held to be protected due to the
government’s substantial interest in the regulation of the draft.
SYMPATHY STRIKE see boycott [SECONDARY BOYCOTT].
SYNALLAGMATIC CONTRACT see contract [BILATERAL].
SYNDICATE a group of individuals or companies who have formed a joint
venture to undertake a project that the individuals would be unable or
unwilling to pursue alone.
EXAMPLE: A large corporation frequently offers stock for sale. An
underwriting syndicate made up of investment bankers and stockbrokers
will first buy the stock, a step made possible by the fact that the
syndicate can pool the resources of its individual members. The
syndicate will then use the combined strength of its members to market
the stock and sell it to the public.
SYSTEM OF JUSTICE see justice [SYSTEM OF JUSTICE].
T
T abbreviation for treasury (as in T-bill, T-bond, and T-note). Also, an
abbreviation for term, testamentum (will), and title. A letter branded
on the thumb of a person who claimed benefit of clergy to prevent a
future claim.
T/A abbreviation for “temporarily assigned.” Often used to designate a
retired judge who has been recalled to limited duty.
TACIT implied or indicated, but not actually expressed; arising without
express contract or agreement. Compare latent.
TACKING adding together; l. in property law, the uniting of the periods of
possession of successive holders to complete the period necessary to
establish title by adverse possession, which is possible provided that
there is privity of estate between the successive adverse possessors.
Thus, the original adverse possessor must transfer the property either by
a voluntary conveyance or by inheritance for tacking to be permitted;
2. As a legislative phrase, tacking designates the practice of adding a
measure that is of doubtful strength on its own merits onto a general
appropriations bill in order to compel the legislature to vote for it; 3. As
applied to mortgages, tacking is joining of a third purchaser’s
encumbrance with his original mortgage debt so as to close out the
second mortgagee.
TAFT-HARTLEY ACT the popular name for the Labor-Management
Relations Act of 1947, whose stated purpose is to protect employers’
rights by broadening their rights to free speech on unionization; by
permitting them to disregard unions formed by supervisory personnel;
by outlawing the closed shop; by permitting employees to refrain from
union activity; by limiting employee elections on whether to unionize to
one per year; by prohibiting unions from forcing employees to join,
from forcing an employer to discriminate against nonunion employees,
from refusing to bargain collectively with the employer, from engaging
in wildcat strikes, from charging discriminatory membership fees, and
from extracting favors or kickbacks from employers.
EXAMPLE: A construction company is not allowed to send any trucks
onto a construction site unless the driver is a union member. The
company therefore cannot hire any drivers unless they belong to a
union. The company has the right to bring a suit for a violation of the
Taft-Hartley Act.
TAIL see fee tail.
TAIL, ESTATE IN see fee tail.
TAINTED EVIDENCE [TAINT] see fruit of the poisonous tree
doctrine.
TAKE [TAKING] 1. acquire property by will or intestate succession. 2.
obtain by possession, whether acquiring legally as in a purchase, or
illegally as in a theft. 3. seize. 4. pay or discharge as in a debt.
TAKING THE FIFTH the popular term given to a person’s assertion of
his Fifth Amendment right not to give evidence that will incriminate
himself. See self-incrimination, privilege against; Fifth Amendment.
TALMUD ancient scriptures containing the oral laws and Rabbinic
writings that provide the foundation for the religious laws of Judaism.
TANGIBLE PROPERTY property, either real or personal, capable of
being possessed. Tangible property is capable of being perceived by the
senses, as distinguished from intangible property or incorporated rights
in property, such as franchises, copyrights, easements. For taxation
purposes, tangible property generally refers to (personal property)
personalty, and is that movable property that has a value of its own,
rather than merely the evidence or representation of value.
TARGET CORPORATION see corporation [TARGET CORPORATION].
TARGETED JOBS CREDIT see tax credit [TARGETED JOBS CREDIT].
TARIFF tax; used most frequently in reference to taxes on imported and
exported goods; a customs duty. Also, a public document setting forth
the services offered of a public utility or carrier, rates and charges with
respect to the services, and governing rules, regulations, and practices
relating to those services.
GATT [GENERAL AGREEMENT ON TARIFFS AND TRADE] an international
agreement signed by most of the nations of the free world, including all
of the major industrial nations, which establishes rules for the conduct
of international trade. The purpose of GATT was to promote the
expansion of world trade by the removal of trade barriers such as tariffs
and customs duties. Under GATT, each signatory country was granted
most favored nation status vis-à-vis each other signatory country. Now
replaced by the World Trade Organization.
TARP abbreviation for Troubled Asset Relief Program. A program created
by an Act of Congress to address the subprime mortgage crisis. The
EMERGENCY ECONOMIC STABILIZATION ACT OF 2008 established a
treasury fund to purchase troubled assets, such as commercial and
residential mortgages, to aid in stabilizing financial institutions against
further losses. With increased liquidity and lessened fear of future
losses, banks would be encouraged to increase their lending instead of
holding onto their cash, thus bringing order, stability, and improved
confidence to the financial marketplace.
TAX a rate or sum of money assessed on a citizen’s person, property or
activity for the support of government, levied upon assets or real
property (property tax), upon income derived from wages, etc. (income
tax), or upon sale or purchase of goods (sales tax).
ABATEMENT OF TAXES see abatement [ABATEMENT OF TAXES].
AD VALOREM TAX see VALUE ADDED TAX (below).
ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX see alternative minimum tax [AMT].
AVOIDANCE OF TAX see avoidance of tax.
CAPITAL GAINS TAX see capital [CAPITAL ASSETS]; capital gains or
losses.
CLAIM OF RIGHT see claim of right.
DEDUCTIONS see deductions; tax deduction.
ESTATE TAX state death taxes imposed upon the net value of a decedent’s
estate. The same tax result is accomplished in some jurisdictions
through imposition of a TRANSFER TAX, which is a tax upon the transfer
of the property from the estate to the beneficiary. See inheritance.
ESTIMATED TAX income taxes that are paid periodically by a taxpayer on
income that is not subject to withholding taxes, in an amount that
represents a projection of ultimate tax liability for the taxable period.
EXCISE TAX a federal tax imposed upon the purchase of certain items,
such as gasoline. See excise.
FEDERAL INSURANCE CONTRIBUTION ACT see FICA.
FICA see FICA.
FRANCHISE TAX a tax generally imposed by the states upon
corporations, often divided into two components: (1) a tax upon the net
income of the corporation attributable to activities within the state, and
(2) the tax on the net worth of the corporation located in the state.
EXAMPLE: A state imposes a tax on “the privilege of doing business” in
the state. As long as the tax is only imposed on the income that the
corporation earns in the state or on the value of the corporation’s assets
in the state, the tax is a valid franchise tax on the corporation.
GIFT TAX see gift tax.
HIDDEN TAX see hidden tax.
INCOME TAX a tax imposed upon value received by the taxpayer, reduced
by the allowable deductions and credits. See return.
INHERITANCE TAX see ESTATE TAX (above); inheritance.
LICENSE TAX see license tax.
PERSONAL HOLDING COMPANY TAX see personal holding company.
POLL TAX see poll tax.
PROGRESSIVE TAX a tax whose rate increases as the amount subject to
tax increases.
PROPERTY TAX a tax imposed by municipalities upon owners of property
within their jurisdiction, based upon the assessed value of such
property.
PROPORTIONAL TAX a tax imposed at a fixed and uniform rate in
proportion to the property subject to the tax.
REFUND see tax refund.
REGRESSIVE TAX a tax whose rate of tax remains the same regardless of
the amounts involved, or decreases as the amount to which the tax is
applied increases.
RETURN see return.
SALES TAX a tax imposed on the retail sale of certain items.
SURTAX see surcharge [SURTAX].
TAX LIEN see lien [TAX LIEN].
TAX REFUND money paid as regards application of limitation statute
governing actions to recover refunds; “refund” is to pay back, return,
restore, make restitution. A “tax exemption” implies that no tax is
payable, while “refund” implies that tax paid is subject to
reimbursement.
TAX SALE see sale [TAX SALE].
TRANSFER TAX see ESTATE TAX (above).
UNIFIED ESTATE AND GIFT TAX a federal tax imposed upon the net value
of an estate and on gifts of certain amounts. Usually, the transferror is
liable for gift taxes, but if the transferror fails to pay, the transferee may
be held liable for payment.
USE TAX a tax imposed upon property when it is brought into the taxing
jurisdiction, usually because the taxing jurisdiction has no jurisdiction
over the sale and therefore cannot impose a sales tax.
EXAMPLE: A state requires a bus company to obtain certificates of title to
operate their buses in that state. The certificates will not be issued until
a tax is paid, based on the fair market value of the buses. The tax is
permitted as a use tax to offset the cost of maintaining the state highways.
VALUE ADDED TAX [AD VALOREM TAX] a tax imposed upon the difference
between the cost of an asset to the taxpayer and the present fair market
value of such asset.
WITHHOLDING TAX the amount of income taxes that an employer is
required to withhold from an employee’s salary when the salary is paid.
The amount withheld is a credit against the amount of income taxes the
employee must pay on his or her income earned for the taxable year.
TAXABLE ESTATE the amount to which the rate of estate tax is applied
in order to determine the amount of estate tax payable. For federal estate
tax purposes, it is the decedent’s gross estate, i.e., all property in which
the decedent had an interest at the time of death as well as specified
other property, less the estate tax deductions, such as marital and
charitable deductions. See tax [ESTATE TAX].
TAXABLE GIFT the amount to which the rate of gift tax is applied in
order to determine the amount of gift tax payable. For federal gift tax
purposes, it is the total amount of gifts made, less the gift tax deductions
allowed, such as the marital and the charitable deductions. The
aggregate of all lifetime gifts that are taxable is added to the decedent’s
estate to determine the applicable estate tax under the unified estate and
gift tax.
TAXABLE INCOME the amount applied to the rate of income tax in order
to determine the income tax payable. For federal income tax purposes, it
is defined differently for corporations and individuals. The taxable
income of a corporation is its gross income less its income tax
deductions. The taxable income of an individual is gross income, less
the deductions allowed in computing the adjusted gross income, less the
excess of itemized deductions over the zero bracket amount. See
deductions [ZERO BRACKET AMOUNT].
TAXABLE YEAR the period during which the tax liability of an
individual or entity is calculated, or, in the case of certain nontaxable
entities, the period for which tax information is provided. Compare
fiscal year.
TAX BENEFIT DOCTRINE a theory that provides for the inclusion in
GROSS INCOME (see income) of amounts deducted in earlier taxable
years and recovered in later years, but only to the extent that the earlier
deductions resulted in a reduction in income tax liability for the earlier
years.
TAX COURT an independent 16-judge federal administrative agency that
functions as a court to hear appeals by taxpayers from adverse
administrative decisions by the Internal Revenue Service. Although
such suits may be considered in federal district courts or in the Court of
Claims, the Tax Court does not require the taxpayer to pay the alleged
deficiency prior to suit. Headquartered in Washington, D.C., the Tax
Court holds hearings in several principal cities as well. Tax court trials
are de novo and an adverse decision may be appealed as of right to the
Court of Appeals and in rare cases to the United States Supreme Court.
TAX CREDIT a dollar-for-dollar reduction in the amount of tax that a
taxpayer owes. Unlike deductions or exemptions, which reduce the
amount of income subject to tax, a credit reduces the actual amount of
tax owed.
INVESTMENT TAX CREDIT tax credit allowed for investments in personal
property devoted to business or income-producing activity, when
certain specific requirements are met.
TARGETED JOBS CREDIT a credit allowed to businesses for increasing the
number of employees they hire.
TAX DEDUCTION an item that may be deducted from a gross amount
subject to tax, in order to yield the net amount. By reducing the amount
subject to tax, a tax deduction will usually reduce the amount of tax
imposed. See deductions.
TAX EVASION the fraudulent and willful underpayment of or nonpayment
of taxes. The term is usually applied to activities that constitute criminal
tax fraud. Evasion is to be distinguished from tax avoidance, whereby
proper interpretation or relevant tax law is made to minimize tax
liability legally.
TAX EXEMPT not subject to tax. Most commonly used to describe tax
exempt interest, which is interest paid by the states or their subdivisions
and is exempt from federal income taxes. Interest paid by the states was
initially exempted from federal income taxation in 1913 under the belief
that taxing such interest would unconstitutionally interfere with the
state’s ability to raise funds. The exemption is now retained by
Congress as a form of revenue sharing with the states.
TAX EXPENDITURE revenue losses that are suffered by the federal
government as a result of provisions of the Internal Revenue Code that
grant special tax benefits to certain kinds of taxpayers or certain
activities engaged in by taxpayers.
TAX EXPENDITURE BUDGET a compilation of various tax expenditures
inherent in the tax system for the year in question.
TAXING POWER under the U.S. Constitution, the power of Congress to
lay and collect taxes, duties, imports, and excises provided that all
duties, imports, and excises shall be uniform throughout the United
States, and to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from whatever source
derived, without apportionment among the several states, and without
regard to any census or enumerations. The taxing power is used
primarily to raise revenue. However, some taxes, such as the estate, gift,
and generation-skipping taxes attempt to affect social policy, while
other taxes, such as the excise tax on gambling and marijuana are used
to regulate or deter certain activities.
TAXPAYER the person who is determined to bear the tax liability for a
given transaction, activity or status.
TAX PREFERENCE ITEMS those items of income, deduction or tax
credit deemed to reflect a preference in the tax law for the taxpayer
benefited by the preference item. Since it is thought that these items
result in preferential treatment that may result in minimal tax liability
for certain taxpayers, notwithstanding substantial GROSS INCOME (see
income), a minimum tax is imposed on the aggregate of the tax
preference items in an attempt to insure a minimum tax liability for each
taxpayer.
TAX RATE the percentage rate of tax imposed. Tax liability is computed
by applying the applicable tax rate to the tax base.
EFFECTIVE TAX RATE the rate at which the taxpayer would be taxed if his
or her tax liability were taxed at a constant rate rather than
progressively. This rate is computed by determining what percentage
the taxpayer’s tax liability is of the taxpayer’s total taxable income. See
tax [PROGRESSIVE TAX].
MARGINAL TAX RATE the highest percentage at which any part of the
taxpayer’s income is taxed.
TAX RETURN see return, income tax.
TAX SALE see sale [TAX SALE].
TAX SHELTER any device by which taxpayers can reduce their tax
liability by engaging in activities that provide them with deductions or
credits that they can apply against their tax liability. In such cases, the
activities engaged in are said to shelter taxpayers’ other income from
tax liability.
EXAMPLE: An individual in a high tax bracket may choose to make an
investment in real estate or oil and gas in order to take advantage of tax
losses that these investments create. The investor, in effect, uses money
he or she would have paid in taxes to offset part of his or her
investment. And if the investment is a good one, he or she may also
make a profit when he or she sells the interest. These types of
investments are referred to as tax shelters.
AT-RISK RULES provisions of the Internal Revenue Code that limit the
amount of loss from business and investment activities that a taxpayer
may deduct to the total amount that he or she has “at risk” in the
activity. A taxpayer is “at risk” in an activity only to the extent of the
cash or other property he or she has invested in the activity and to the
extent he or she is personally liable for the debts of the activity secured
by his or her property.
TEMPORARY that which is to last for a limited time; ephemeral;
transitory. Temporary has no fixed meaning in the sense that it
designates a fixed period of time, but is used in contradistinction to
permanent. See injunction; interim financing; interim order;
restraining order.
TEMPORARY INJUNCTION see injunction; restraining order.
TEMPORARY RESTRAINING ORDER see restraining order.
TEMPORE (te*m’-po@-ra@) Lat.: for the time of; thus, the “President pro
tempore” of the United States Senate is the Senate President for the
present time (when the Vice President is not presiding over the Senate).
TENANCY a tenant’s right to possess an estate, whether by lease or by
title; 1. refers generally to any right to hold property; 2. refers to
holding in subordination to another’s title, as in the landlord-tenant
relationship.
COTENANCY see cotenancy.
HOLDOVER TENANCY see TENANCY AT SUFFERANCE (below).
JOINT TENANCY a single estate in property, real or personal, owned by
two or more persons, under one instrument or act of the parties, with
an equal right in all to share in the enjoyment during their lives; and on
the death of a joint tenant, the property descends to the survivor or
survivors and at length to the last survivor. Joint tenancy originally was
a technical feudal estate in land, but now also applies, through statutes,
to personal property (stocks, bonds, bank accounts, with right of
survivorship). See joint tenancy [ownership].
PERIODIC TENANCY in landlord-tenant law, a tenancy for a particular
period (a week, month, year or number of years), plus the expectancy or
possibility that the period will be repeated. In contrast to a TENANCY FOR
YEARS, a periodic tenancy must be terminated by due notice by either
the landlord or the tenant, unless one party has failed to perform some
part of his obligation. A periodic tenancy is considered a form of
TENANCY AT WILL and is created either by express agreement of by
implication from the manner in which rent is paid. A periodic tenancy is
alienable.
TENANCY AT SUFFERANCE [HOLDOVER TENANCY] a tenancy that comes
into existence when one at first lawfully possesses land, as under a
lease, and subsequently holds over beyond the end of one term of the
lease or occupies it without such lawful authority. A tenancy at
sufferance therefore cannot arise from an agreement, distinguishing it
from a TENANCY AT WILL. A tenant at sufferance differs from a
trespasser only in that he originally entered with the landlord’s
permission. The landlord has a right to establish a landlord-tenant
relationship (i.e., extend the lease) of a tenant at sufferance.
EXAMPLE: Lance has completed the one-year lease on his apartment. He
continues to reside there although the landlord does nothing to
acknowledge that he is there, including not accepting rent checks. Lance
is a tenant at sufferance. He may have certain rights, though, depending on
the state he is in, possibly including a right to one week’s or thirty days’
notice before eviction.
TENANCY AT WILL a leased estate that confers upon the tenant the right
to possession that both parties agree is for an unpredetermined period
and that either party may terminate upon proper notice. A tenancy at
will may arise out of an express contract or by implication. Because a
tenancy at will is determinable at any time, the tenant cannot assign or
grant his estate to another.
TENANCY BY THE ENTIRETY ownership of property, real or personal,
tangible and intangible, by a husband and wife together. Neither
husband nor wife is allowed to alienate any part of the property so held
without consent of the other. The survivor of the marriage is entitled to
the whole property. A divorce severs the tenancies by the entirety and
usually creates a tenancy in common. Under the MARRIED WOMAN’S
ACTS each tenant by the entirety is a tenant in common of the use, and is
therefore entitled to one half of the rents and profits while both are
alive.
TENANCY FOR YEARS an estate in land created by a lease that is limited to
a specified and definite term, whether in weeks, months or years. If the
tenant stays beyond expiration of the term, the tenancy may be
converted into a TENANCY AT SUFFERANCE, TENANCY AT WILL, or a
PERIODIC TENANCY. A tenancy for years is alienable, subject to lease
restrictions against assignment or sublease.
TENANCY FROM MONTH TO MONTH see PERIODIC TENANCY (above).
TENANCY FROM YEAR TO YEAR see PERIODIC TENANCY (above).
TENANCY IN CAPITE tenancy-in-chief. In feudal law, the holding of land
direct from the crown.
TENANCY IN COMMON an interest held by two or more persons, each
having a possessory right, usually deriving from a title (though perhaps
also from a lease) in the same piece of land. Tenancy in common also
applies to personalty. Though co-tenants may have unequal shares in the
property, they are each entitled to equal use and possession. Thus, each
is said to have an undivided interest in the property. An estate held as a
tenancy in common may be partitioned, sold or encumbered.
TENANT 1. one who holds land by any kind of title or right, whether
permanently or temporarily; 2. one who purchases an estate and is
entitled to possession, whether exclusive or to be shared with others; 3.
one who leases premises from the owner (landlord) or from a tenant as
his subtenant. See also tenancy.
TENANTABLE REPAIR see good tentable repair.
TENANT FOR LIFE see life tenant.
TENANT IN FEE (SIMPLE) a tenant in fee simple who has lands,
tenements, or hereditaments to hold to him or her and the heirs forever.
The word fee alone, without any qualifying words, serves to designate a
fee simple estate, and is not frequently used in that sense.
A tenant in fee simple or fee simple absolute holds the greatest estate
known to law. The word simple is used to indicate that there are no
restrictions with respect to the inheritance characteristics of the estate.
The word absolute emphasizes that the estate is not defeasible upon the
happening of any event.
TENANTS IN TAIL see failure of issue [TENANTS IN TAIL].
TENDER an unconditional offer to pay or perform in full an obligation
owed to another, together with either actual presentation of the thing or
sum owed, or some clear manifestation of present ability to pay or
perform.
LEGAL TENDER any kind of currency or other such medium of commerce
designated by law as one that must be accepted in satisfaction of
monetary debt.
TENDER OFFER a publicly announced effort to purchase the stock of a
company, not through open market transactions but through direct
dealings with present shareholders, for the purpose of acquiring
controlling ownership of that company.
TENDER OF DELIVERY the seller’s placement at the buyer’s disposal of
goods sold to him or her. A seller’s failure to tender delivery at the
proper place, according to contract, may constitute a breach unless he
or she has a lawful excuse; a buyer’s refusal to take delivery at the
proper place may constitute a breach on his or her part.
EXAMPLE: Scholarly Book Publishers contracts with a book wholesaler to
distribute its books nationwide. Scholarly arranges to have the books
shipped to the wholesaler’s main warehouse on a specific date, and the
wholesaler agrees to pick them up there. Scholarly fulfills its obligation,
but the wholesaler does not take the books on the date agreed upon. Two
days later, the books are destroyed by fire. Since Scholarly completed
its tender of delivery, the wholesaler must pay for the damage. See CIF
[COST, INSURANCE AND FREIGHT]; free alongside [FAS]; free on board
[FOB]. See also bill of lading.
TENDER OFFER a public offer made to shareholders of a particular
corporation to purchase from them a specific number of shares of
stock at a specific price. The price quoted in such an offer is payable
only if the offeror is able to obtain the total amount of stock specified in
the offer. The number is usually sufficient to give the offeror control of
the corporation.
TENEMENT permanent and fixed property including both corporeal and
incorporeal real property. In modern usage, tenement applies to any
structure attached to land, and also to any kind of dwelling inhabited by
a tenant. Tenement is frequently used to indicate dilapidated apartment
dwellings.
10-K an audited, annual, comprehensive overview of the business and
financial condition of a corporation registered to sell securities that is
filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Compare 10-Q.
10-Q a comprehensive quarterly report filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission by all corporations registered to sell securities.
A 10-Q provides information similar to that reported on the 10-K.
TENTH AMENDMENT the amendment to the U.S. Constitution, referred
to as the RESERVED POWERS AMENDMENT, that reserves to the states or
the people any powers not delegated to the United States nor prohibited
to the states by the Constitution. It expresses the original framers’ intent
that the central government be a government of limited powers and was
included in the Bill of Rights to prevent the federal government from
attempting to exercise powers it was not specifically given.
Traditionally, the Tenth Amendment has been viewed as a mere truism
that restates the relationship between the states and the federal
government. However, the Supreme Court has held that the amendment
bars Congress from exercising power that impinges directly upon state
functions essential to the states’ separate and independent existence.
TENURE right to hold; 1. in real property, an ancient hierarchical system
of holding lands; 2. a statutory right of certain civil servants, teachers in
the public schools and other employees to retain their positions
permanently, subject only to removal for adequate cause or economic
necessity.
TENURIAL OWNERSHIP see ownership [TENURIAL OWNERSHIP].
TERMINABLE INTEREST an interest in property that will fail or
terminate on the lapse of time, on the occurrence of an event or a
contingency, or on the failure of an event or a contingency to occur. The
term is used to describe a class of property that generally does not
qualify for the marital deduction for federal estate and gift tax purposes.
TERMINER see oyer and terminer.
TERM INSURANCE see insurance [TERM INSURANCE].
TERM OF ART see words of art.
TERM OF COURT a definite time period prescribed by law for a court to
administer its duties. Term and session are often used interchangeably,
but, technically, term is the statutory time prescribed for judicial
business and session is the time a court actually sits to hear cases. In
general, terms of court no longer have any special significance, fixed
periods of days having replaced the stated terms of court.
TERMS OF SERVICE [USE] rules which must be agreed to in order to
use a service; a disclaimer. See clickwrap [clickthrough] license.
TERM, SUCCESSIVE see successive terms.
TERRITORIAL COURT a court established by Congress under the
Constitution, which gives Congress the power to make all needful rules
and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to
the United States.
TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION the territory over which a government
or a subdivision thereof has jurisdiction; relates to a tribunal’s power
with regard to the territory within which it is to be exercised, and
connotes power over property and persons within such territory.
TERRITORIAL WATERS all inland waters, waters between the line of
mean high tide and mean low tide, and all waters seaward to a line three
geographical miles from the coastline generally constitute the territorial
waters of a country.
TERROREM see in terrorem.
TERRORISM the use or threatened use of fear or violence as a means of
coercion. Often used for political, ideological, or religious advantage. If
sponsored or sanctioned by a government, it is known as STATE [STATESPONSORED] TERRORISM. Compare false [public] alarm.
TERRORISTIC THREAT [THREATENING] see threat [TERRORISTIC
THREAT].
TESTACY the condition of leaving a valid will at one’s death. Compare
intestacy.
TESTAMENT strictly, a testimonial or just statement of a person’s wishes
concerning the disposition of his personal property after death, in
contrast to a will, which is strictly a devise of real estate. Commonly,
however, will and testament are considered synonymous.
TESTAMENTARY CAPACITY the mental capacity that a person must
have at the time of the execution of his or her will in order for the will
to be valid. Testamentary capacity usually requires that the person
comprehend the nature and extent of his or her property, the persons
who are the natural objects of his or her bounty, and the dispositive
effect of the act of executing the will. It is synonymous with sound
mind.
TESTAMENTARY DISPOSITION a gift of property that vests (takes
effect) at the time of the death of the person making the disposition. It
can be effected by deed, by an inter vivos transaction or by will. All
instruments used to make testamentary dispositions must comply with
the requirements of the statute of wills. See causa mortis.
EXAMPLE: A father owns 100 shares of stock. He makes a gift to his son
as follows: “To myself for life, then to my son.” The gift to the son is a
testamentary disposition since it does not take effect until the father’s death.
TESTAMENTARY INTENT a determination that must be made by a
probate court that the document was intended by the writer to be a will
and as such reflects his or her true wishes. If fraud or undue influence
is found, then the will is not admitted to probate. See testator
[testatrix].
TESTAMENTARY TRUST see trust [TESTAMENTARY TRUST].
TESTATOR [TESTATRIX] one who makes and executes a testament or
will, testator applying to a man, testatrix to a woman. See intestate;
testacy; testament; testamentary disposition. Compare
administrator; executor.
TEST CASE [ACTION] a lawsuit that tests the validity of a law or a legal
principle. Usually, the case is one of many similar cases pending, and is
chosen for decision prior to the others because its facts are most
representative of the issue. Often the case is brought about intentionally
by a group interested in determining the validity of the law.
Such cases are limited by the case or controversy doctrine that prohibits
parties from bringing collusive suits before the court. See controversy
[CASE OR CONTROVERSY].
TESTIFY the making of a statement under oath or affirmation in a
judicial proceeding; to make a solemn declaration under oath or
affirmation for the purpose of establishing proof of some fact to the
court. See examination; false swearing; perjury; testimony; witness.
TESTIMONIAL IMMUNITY see self-incrimination, privilege against
[TESTIMONIAL [USE] IMMUNITY].
TESTIMONY statement made by a witness, under oath, usually related to
a legal proceeding or legislative hearing; evidence given by a
competent witness under oath or affirmation, as distinguished from
evidence derived from writing and other sources.
TESTIS Lat.: witness.
THEFT see larceny.
THING IN ACTION see chose [CHOSE IN ACTION].
THIRD DEGREE imposing mental (by intense questioning or threats) or
physical (food or sleep deprivation) coercion upon a suspect in order to
obtain a confession. Compare torture. Also, a level of crime (such as
third-degree theft) having a lower sentencing exposure than a more
serious second- or first-degree crime.
THIRD PARTY see party [THIRD PARTY].
THIRD PARTY BENEFICIARY a person having enforceable rights
created by a contract to which he or she is not a party and for which he
or she gives no consideration. The third person is a DONEE
BENEFICIARY if the promisee expressed an intention to confer a benefit
upon the third person as a gift in the form of the promised performance.
He or she is a CREDITOR BENEFICIARY if the promisee, or some other
person, is under an obligation under the contract, or the making of the
executory contract itself, will satisfy and discharge that obligation. To
be enforceable by the third party beneficiary, the contract must be
primarily for his or her benefit.
THIRD PARTY PLAINTIFF see plaintiff [THIRD PARTY PLAINTIFF].
THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT the amendment to the United States
Constitution that prohibits slavery and involuntary servitude and
empowers Congress to enforce the amendment by appropriate
legislation. The Thirteenth Amendment was passed in 1863 during the
Civil War. It not only prohibits slavery but also forbids PEONAGE, which
is a condition of involuntary servitude based on indebtedness. The
Thirteenth Amendment is self-enacting as regards slavery, and permits
Congress to pass legislation forbidding badges of slavery such as all
forms of racial discrimination, private and public, in the sale and rental
of property. Further, a state may not enact laws designed to force
employees to stay on their jobs by, for example, making it a crime to
terminate private employment. However, a state may punish a crime
through forced labor, and may compel labor on behalf of the
government, such as highway labor.
THREAT a declaration of an intention or determination to inflict
punishment, loss, or pain on another, or to injure another by some
wrongful act. A threat may be made by means of innuendo or
suggestion as well as by express language. Threats may be the basis of
criminal or civil liability. Mere words, however violent, have been held
not to amount to an assault. See coercion; extortion; fighting words;
mental cruelty.
THREE STRIKES laws imposing longer prison sentences for certain
repeat offenders. Most significantly, they require that a person who is
convicted of a felony and who has been previously convicted of two or
more violent or serious felonies receive a sentence enhancement. A
SENTENCE ENHANCEMENT is additional time added to a criminal
defendant’s sentence for specified reasons relating to the nature of the
crime or the offender’s criminal history. Examples include the addition
of five years for possession of a firearm during the commission of a
felony or an additional 10 years for an offender who commits a violent
felony and who has served a prior prison term for a violent felony. The
Three Strikes law is an example of a sentence enhancement because
third strikers receive additional time in prison for their current offense
because of their prior convictions for serious or violent crimes. See
criminal [HABITUAL OFFENDER]; sentence [EXTENDED TERM].
EXAMPLE: Maxwell has two prior aggravated assault convictions. When
he is arrested for carjacking, the state moves to prosecute him under the
three strikes’ provisions. Maxwell’s prison exposure for carjacking is
thereby raised from 20 years to life without parole.
THRIFT INSTITUTIONS generic name for savings banks and savings
and loan associations. See bank.
TIDE LAND land covered and uncovered by ordinary tides. See also
avulsion; reliction.
TIERED SERVICE offerings on the Internet at various price levels. One
level (of limited information) may be free, and other levels may require
a subscription or provide a specific period of time within which usage
is allowed.
TIME see reasonable time.
TIME ARBITRAGE see arbitrage [TIME ARBITRAGE].
TIME DRAFT see draft [TIME DRAFT].
TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE a term used in contracts that fixes time of
performance as a vital term of the contract, the breach of which may
operate as a discharge of the entire contract. The phrase emphasizes that
performance by one party at the time specified in the contract is
essential in order to enable him to require performance from the other
party.
TIME SHARING an arrangement by which either (1) multiple owners (or
long-term lessees) of a condominium unit agree contractually to
reserve to one another exclusively the use of the unit (and of the
common elements associated with unit ownership) for a portion of the
year, at the same time each year, or (2) individual owners purchase an
interest in the unit (and associated common elements) that is limited in
duration to a specified portion of each year and thereby divide the
ownership of the unit into intervals, also referred to as INTERVAL
OWNERSHIP.
EXAMPLE: A group of friends purchase a condominium at a ski resort.
They develop a time-sharing arrangement to fit each person’s desire, with
Pedro reserving two weeks in the spring. Unless the agreement states
otherwise, as an owner Pedro can do whatever he wants with those
weeks, including renting to others.
TIME, UNITY OF see unities [UNITY OF TIME].
TITHE in old English law, a right of the clergy to exact for the use of the
Church one-tenth of the produce of the lands and personal industry of
the people.
TITLE ownership; a term used in property law to denote the composite of
facts that will permit one to recover or to retain possession of a thing.
EXAMPLE: Marty’s car is stolen, and the thief sells it to another person
who pays a fair value for the car and has no knowledge or suspicion that
it is stolen. Marty still has superior title to the car over the other person
even though the person paid money for the vehicle. As a basic principle
of law, ordinarily one cannot take title from a thief.
ADVERSE TITLE a title asserted in opposition to another; one claimed to
have been acquired by adverse possession.
AFTER-ACQUIRED TITLE see after-acquired title.
BAD TITLE see bad title.
CERTIFICATE OF TITLE see certificate of title.
CHAIN OF TITLE see chain of title.
CLEAR TITLE see clear title.
CLEAR TITLE OF RECORD a title that the record shows to be an
indefeasible unencumbered estate.
CLOUD ON TITLE see cloud on title.
COLOR OF TITLE see color of title.
DEFECTIVE TITLE see defective title.
DOCUMENT OF TITLE see document of title.
EQUITABLE TITLE ownership that is recognized by a court of equity or
founded upon equitable principles, as opposed to formal legal title. The
purchaser of real property can require specific performance of his
contract for purchase and as a result, prior to the actual conveyance, he
has an enforceable equitable title that can be terminated only by a bona
fide purchaser.
GOOD TITLE see good title.
MARKETABLE TITLE see marketable title.
PARAMOUNT TITLE see paramount title.
QUIET TITLE see quiet title.
TITLE (OF A STATUTE) the heading of a statute or legislative bill, which
introduces it by giving a brief description or summary of the matters it
embraces.
UNITY OF TITLE see unities [UNITY OF TITLE].
TITLE INSURANCE insurance policy guaranteeing clear title to the
purchaser of real property. Should any defects or encumbrances, such
as liens or competing claims, exist in the title, the insurer will correct
the problem or pay damages to the mortgagee or owner.
TITLE JURISDICTION a jurisdiction in which title to mortgaged
premises passes to the mortgagee, and only passes back to mortgagor
when full payment is made. See lien jurisdiction.
TITLE SEARCH an investigation of documents in the public record office
to determine the state of a title, including all liens, encumbrances,
mortgages, future interests, etc., affecting the property; the means by
which a chain of title is ascertained.
TITLE THEORY see mortgage; title jurisdiction.
TOLL 1. to bar, defeat. To toll the statute of limitations means to suspend
the limitation.
EXAMPLE: State law provides that a person has 45 days to file an appeal
from a conviction and that a judge must inform the person of that limit.
At the end of Randolph’s trial, the judge fails to inform him of the limit.
When he is informed five months later, it is technically too late to file.
A court may toll the 45-day limit until Randolph is informed of its
existence, which in this case would be five months after the conviction.
If an appeal is then not filed within 45 days, the opportunity will not be
granted again.
2. charge for the use of another’s property. 3. consideration for the
use of roads, bridges, ferries or other public facilities.
TOMBSTONE AD a common expression for a newspaper advertisement
announcing the sale or purchase of securities in a corporation. The
term derives from the fact that such advertisements usually consist of all
copy and no illustrations, and thus look like a tombstone. A tombstone
ad is merely a public announcement concerning such transactions and
does not constitute either an offer to sell or to buy the securities. Such
offers constitute and may only be made by a prospectus.
TONNAGE in commercial usage, the weight (in number of tons) a ship or
vessel will carry, as estimated by the official measurement and
computation prescribed by public authority.
TONNAGE DUTY a tax imposed on ships that enter the United States; it is
called tonnage duty since it is based upon the ship’s tonnage.
TORT a wrong; a private or civil wrong or injury resulting from a breach
of a legal duty that exists by virtue of society’s expectations regarding
interpersonal conduct, rather than by contract or other private
relationship. The essential elements of a tort are existence of a legal
duty owed by defendant to plaintiff, breach of that duty and a causal
relation between defendant’s conduct and the resulting damage to
plaintiff. See also derivative tort.
EXAMPLE: Chandler places a large object on a railroad track to see what
happens when it is hit by an oncoming train. The train derails in a set of
circumstances that would not have occurred if there had been no object
on the track. Chandler has committed an intentional tort against the
railroad and its passengers. He committed a crime as well.
TORT CLAIMS ACT statute passed by Congress and most states that
waives sovereign immunity from liability in tort and allows a suit to be
brought against a governmental entity under certain circumstances. See
Federal Tort Claims Act.
TORTFEASOR one who commits a tort.
JOINT TORTFEASORS those who act together or independently to commit
a tortious act, causing a single injury. See contribution; joint
tortfeasors.
TORTIOUS describes conduct that subjects the actor(s) to tort liability;
unlawful.
TORTURE any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or
mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes as
obtaining from him or her or a third person information or a confession,
punishing him or her for an act he or she or a third person has
committed or is suspected of having committed, or intimidating or
coercing him or her or a third person, or for any reason based on
discrimination of any kind, when such pain or suffering is inflicted by
or at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public
official or other person acting in an official capacity. It does not include
pain or suffering arising only from, inherent in, or incidental to lawful
sanctions.
TORTURE VICTIM PROTECTION ACT see alien tort claims act
[TORTURE VICTIM PROTECTION ACT].
TOS terms of service. See clickwrap [clickthrough] license.
TOTAL DISABILITY as used in insurance contracts, a person’s inability
to perform the material duties of some occupation for which he or she is
qualified by experience or training. Absolute physical disability or
helplessness is not necessary for “total disability” to exist. See workers’
compensation acts.
TOTAL INCORPORATION see selective incorporation [TOTAL
INCORPORATION APPROACH].
TOTALITY OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES TEST a test used to
determine whether certain constitutional rights of a defendant have been
violated. The test looks to all the circumstances attending the alleged
violation, rather than to any particular factors. While some factors may
recur more frequently than others, the relative importance of any one
factor depends upon the particular facts of a case. The test was
originally used to determine whether a confession was coerced from a
defendant in violation of his or her privilege against self-incrimination,
until the Miranda case required that a defendant have his or her rights
read to him or her. The test is currently used to determine whether a
defendant consented to a warrantless search, and whether probable
cause exists for the issuance of a search warrant.
TOTAL LOSS in insurance contracts, the destruction of property such that
it is no longer useful for its intended purpose, or that renders it of little
or no value to the owner.
TOTO see in toto.
TOU terms of use. See clickwrap [clickthrough] license.
TOUCH AND CONCERN in real property law, a requirement for a
covenant that “runs with the land” is that it touch and concern the land
involved. A covenant runs with the land when the rights or liabilities of
the covenant pass to the succeeding owners with the title to the land. A
covenant touches and concerns the land when it enhances the enjoyment
of one parcel of real property by burdening the enjoyment of another.
For instance, a covenant in a building development that each property
owner paint his or her house a specific color would run with the land.
TO WIT namely; that is to say.
TRACT INDEX see chain of title.
TRADE EXPENSE see expense [TRADE OR BUSINESS EXPENSE].
TRADE, FAIR see fair trade laws.
TRADE FIXTURE property placed on or annexed to rented real estate by
a tenant for the purpose of aiding the tenant in the conduct of a trade or
business. The law makes provision for, and leases often expressly
permit (or require), the tenant to remove such fixtures at the end of his
or her tenancy, though the tenant is responsible to the landlord for any
damage to the premises resulting from such removal. Other fixtures,
which are considered improvements, the tenant must leave intact.
Compare waste.
TRADEMARK any mark, word, letter, number, design, picture or
combination thereof in any form, which is adopted and used by a person
to denominate goods that he or she makes, is affixed to the goods, and is
neither a common or generic name for the goods nor a picture of them,
nor is merely descriptive of the goods.
Protection from infringement upon a trademark is afforded by the common
law action for unfair competition.
TRADE NAME name under which a person identifies his or her business
or vocation. A trade name or commercial name applied to the business and
its good will. Compare trademarks, which apply only to vendable
commodities and have different legal protections.
TRADE, RESTRAINT OF see restraint of trade.
TRADE SECRETS any formula, pattern, machine or process of
manufacturing used in one’s business that may give the user opportunity
to obtain advantage over competitors; a plan or process, tool,
mechanism or compound, known only to its owner and those of the
owner’s employees to whom it is necessary to disclose it. A trade secret
is distinguished from a patent in that the owner holds no exclusive
rights to it as against the public, though the owner may seek an
injunction or damages for trade secrets unlawfully obtained from him
or her.
EXAMPLE: Janeen works for a whiskey distilling company. There is no
patent on the formula for making the liquor, although the formula has
been used for over one hundred years. Janeen leaves the company to
work for someone else. The company can legally prevent Janeen from
using the formula since it is a trade secret that no one has ever been able to
duplicate.
TRADE USAGE a practice widely accepted and relied upon in numerous
transactions in a particular trade or industry. A meaning given to
language due to its general acceptance in a trade or industry and the
reasonable reliance of the parties on such meaning. The Uniform
Commercial Code uses the synonymous term USAGE OF TRADE, which
is defined as any practice or method of dealing having such regularity of
observance in a place, vocation, or trade as to justify an expectation that
it will be observed with respect to the transaction in question. The
existence and scope of such a usage are to be proved as facts. If it is
established that such a usage is embodied in a written trade code or
similar writing, the interpretation of the writing is for the court.
A COURSE OF DEALING is to be distinguished from a trade usage in
that the course of dealing is based upon a sequence of previous conduct
between the parties to a particular transaction that is fairly to be
regarded as establishing a common basis of understanding for
interpreting their expressions and other conduct. The express terms of
an agreement and an applicable course of dealing or trade usage should
be construed wherever reasonable as consistent with each other, but
when such construction is unreasonable, express terms control both
course of dealing and trade usage while course of dealing controls trade
usage.
TRADITIONARY EVIDENCE statements of fact based upon tradition,
long-standing reputation, and statements made by deceased persons that
are admissible to prove pedigree and ancient boundaries when no living
witnesses are available to testify about such matters.
TRAFFICKING illegally transporting or trading goods or people. HUMAN
TRAFFICKING is (1) the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harboring,
enticement, provision, obtaining, or receipt of a person by any means,
for the purpose of: (i) debt bondage or forced labor or services, (ii)
slavery or practices similar to slavery, or (iii) the removal of organs
through the use of coercion or intimidation; or (2) receiving profit or
anything of value, knowing or having reason to know it is derived from
one of the acts described. It includes forced prostitution or sexual
services, domestic servitude, bonded sweatshop labor, or other debt
bondage. See also involuntary servitude.
TRAK FLYER Technology to Recover Abducted Children: a computergenerated system to create and disseminate (among law enforcement
agencies and the media) images of a missing child or a wanted criminal,
similar to a wanted poster.
TRANSACTION an event or series of events that have tax consequences.
CLOSED TRANSACTION a deal in which all events have occurred to allow
the transaction to be subject to tax.
OPEN TRANSACTION a deal in which events have not occurred to allow
the transaction to be subject to tax.
SHAM TRANSACTION one that will be ignored because it is deemed to
have no substance.
STEP TRANSACTION one that consists of a number of interdependent
steps and will, generally, be subject to tax based upon all the various
steps rather than upon each intermediate step.
TRANSACTIONAL IMMUNITY see self-incrimination, privilege
against.
TRANSACTIONS OR OCCURRENCE TEST in civil practice, the
requirement that a party must make a counterclaim for all causes of
action arising from the same transaction or occurrence that is the
subject matter of the opposing party’s claim. The failure to bring the
counterclaim may result in the party being barred from ever litigating
his or her claim. See counterclaim [COMPULSORY COUNTERCLAIM]. The
purpose of the rule is to avoid the expense that would result from a
multiplicity of lawsuits. Transaction is liberally construed to encompass
any series of occurrences that are logically connected.
TRANSCRIPT an official and certified copy of proceedings in court or at
an out-of-court deposition. The transcript is usually prepared by a court
reporter from shorthand notes made during the proceeding.
TRANSFER to convey or remove from one person or place to another; to
sell or give; specifically, to take over possession or control as in the
transfer of title to land.
TRANSFER AGENT individual or firm that keeps a record of the
shareholders of a corporation by name, address, and number of shares
owned. When stock is sold, the new owner through his or her agent
presents the shares purchased to the transfer agent, who cancels the old
certificates and issues new certificates registered in the name of the
owner. Not every stock transaction results in a transfer, since a
significant portion of most issues is held in street name to support
margin or for the convenience of the owner.
TRANSFEREE LIABILITY a tax liability of a taxpayer that is imposed
upon another person who is the transferee of property from the taxpayer
under specified circumstances, in which the taxpayer is unable, because
of the transfer, to pay tax liability. In general, the transferee can be
liable only to the extent of the value of the property transferred,
although the liability is personal and can be recovered from any assets
of the transferee. TRANSFEREE, for purposes of imposition of this
liability, includes heirs, donees of gifts and shareholders of dissolved
corporations, but does not include people who act as mere agents for
others.
TRANSFER IN CONTEMPLATION OF DEATH see cause [CAUSA
MORTIS]; gift [GIFT IN CONTEMPLATION OF DEATH].
TRANSFERRED INTENT a doctrine in tort law and criminal law that
provides that if a defendant intends harm to A but harms B instead, the
intent is said to be transferred to the harm befalling the actual victim as far
as defendant’s liability to B is concerned. This is only a fiction, or a legal
conclusion, created in order to accomplish the desired result in terms of
liability. The doctrine is applicable in criminal law and finds most
frequent application in a homicide context (T.J. shoots at Wang Jun but
misses and kills an innocent bystander).
TRANSPORTATION see deportation [TRANSPORTATION].
TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION [TSA] see
Department of Homeland Security [DHS] [TRANSPORTATION
SECURITY ADMINISTRATION [TSA]].
TRAVERSE a common law pleading that denies the opposing party’s
allegations of fact.
GENERAL TRAVERSE a blanket denial, stated in general terms, intended to
cover all the allegations.
SPECIAL TRAVERSE a denial that is not absolute, but that seeks to
establish a denial through the presentation of supplementary facts (or
new matter) that, if accurate, would render the allegations untenable.
TREASON a crime defined by the Constitution: “treason against the
United States shall consist only in levying war against them, or in
adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort.”
EXAMPLE: The United States is engaged in war with another country. A
U.S. arms manufacturer sells munitions to a private party but with the
express knowledge that the munitions will be transferred to the other
country at war. The manufacturer may be guilty of treason.
Compare sedition.
TREASURE TROVE money, coin, gold, silver, plate, bullion, or any other
item of value found hidden in the earth or in a private place, such as a
house, whose owner is unknown. Treasure trove is distinguished from
lost property in that it must have been hidden by the owner for
safekeeping and not parted with voluntarily. In the absence of statute,
the finder of treasure trove has a legal claim to it against all the world
except the true owner. See abandonment.
TREASURY the subdivision of a government, corporation, or other entity
that is responsible for its financial affairs. The United States Department
of the Treasury includes the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms,
the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the United States
Customs Service, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Federal
Law Enforcement Training Center, the Bureau of Government Financial
Operations, the Internal Revenue Service, the Bureau of the Mint, the
Bureau of the Public Debt, the United States Savings Bond Division,
and the United States Secret Service. The basic functions of the
Department of the Treasury are to develop and propose national and
international economic and tax policies; to serve as the government’s
financial agent, to collect taxes, to disburse funds, and to manage the
public debt; to produce currency and coins; and to enforce specific
groups of laws.
TREASURY BILL a U.S. government promissory note issued by the U.S.
Treasury, having maturity periods up to one year. Notes having longer
maturities are called Treasury notes and very long maturities are called
Treasury bonds. Treasury bills are sold at a discount to face value,
which is paid at maturity. Denominations are $10,000 or multiples
thereof, although smaller denominations are offered when money is in
short supply. Money market trading is very active with large dollar
amounts of Treasury bills, which are bearer instruments, changing
hands daily. Also known as T-BILLS.
TREASURY BOND 1. a long-term debt instrument issued by the U.S.
Government. Issues of the U.S. Government have the highest rating
among so-called fixed income or debt securities and, therefore, offer
the lowest taxable yield of any bonds. Also known as T-BONDS.
2. a bond that has been bought back by the issuing corporation. See
treasury stock. Such Treasury bonds are usually retired as part of
sinking fund requirements or held in the corporate treasury, which
reduces interest expense.
TREASURY NOTE an intermediate term (one to five years) obli-gation of
the U.S. Government that bears interest paid by coupon. Like all direct
U.S. Government obligations, Treasury notes carry the highest domestic
credit standing and thus have the lowest taxable yield available at
equivalent maturity. Also known as T-NOTES.
TREASURY SHARES [STOCK] common or preferred stock that had
been issued by a company and later reacquired. The stock may be used
for a variety of corporate purposes, such as a stock bonus plan for
management and employees or to acquire another company, or it may be
held indefinitely, resold or retired. While held in the company treasury,
the stock earns no dividends and has no vote in company affairs.
TREATY a compact made between two or more independent nations with
a view to the public welfare: Under the Constitution, the President has
the sole power to initiate and make treaties, which must be approved by
the Senate before they become binding on citizens of the United States
as law. An EXECUTIVE AGREEMENT is often substituted for a treaty and
does not require the advice and consent of the Senate, though it may be
entered into pursuant to formal authority delegated by the Congress in
particular legislation. Executive agreements, however, are restricted to
narrower topics. Trade agreements, for example, are often executive
agreements rather than treaties.
TREATY CLAUSE portion of the United States Constitution providing
that the President shall have power, by and with the advice and consent
of the Senate to make treaties, provided two-thirds of the Senators
present concur.
TREBLE DAMAGES the amount of damages awarded to an injured
party, whereby the judge triples the amount that the jury awards; it acts
to punish the wrongdoer in addition to compensating the injured party.
This is a statutory remedy most often awarded in antitrust violations.
See damages [DOUBLE [TREBLE] DAMAGES].
TRESPASS 1. in common law, a form of action instituted to recover
damages for any unlawful injury to the plaintiff’s person, property or
rights, involving immediate force or violence; 2. the violent act that
causes such injury; 3. most often connotes a wrongful interference with
the possession of property and is applied to personal property
(personalty) as well as to realty.
EXAMPLE: Jun erects a fence that inadvertently crosses adjoining
property. He trespasses on that property and is responsible for all damage
that results from his action.
CONTINUING TRESPASS one that is not intermittent or transient, as where
one dumps garbage upon the land of another. In such a case, there is a
continuing wrong so long as the offending object remains.
TRESPASS DE BONIS ASPORTATIS (da@bo@’-nĭs äs-pôr-tä’-tĭs) Lat.: trespass for
goods carried off. A common law action brought to recover damages
from a person who has taken goods or property from the rightful owner.
TRESPASS ON THE CASE one of the two early English actions at common
law dealing with what are now known as torts (the other being simply
trespass). Trespass on the case afforded remedy against injury to person
or property indirectly resulting from the conduct of the defendant. The
action of trespass covered only directly resulting injury.
TRESPASS QUARE CLAUSUM FREGIT see quare clausum fregit.
TRESPASS VI ET ARMIS (ve@e*t är’mĭs) Lat.: force and arms. 1. trespass with
force and arms, or by unlawful means; 2. a remedy for injuries
accompanied with force, or where the act done is itself an immediate
injury to another’s person or property.
TRESPASSER one who enters or remains upon land of another without the
owner’s permission. The owner of the land has no duty to guard against
injury of a trespasser and is not liable if a trespasser injures himself or
herself unless an unjustified risk of injury to such persons is created,
such as by the use of spring guns or human traps. See trespass.
Compare invitee; licensee.
TRESPASS ON THE CASE see trespass [TRESPASS ON THE CASE].
TRIAL an examination, usually involving the offering of testimony, before
a competent tribunal according to established procedures, of facts or
law put in issue in a cause for the purpose of determining such issue.
BENCH TRIAL the trial of a matter where the court sits without a jury;
trial by a judge. Both parties must waive any constitutional or statutory
right to trial by jury. Compare jury trial.
NEW TRIAL a re-examination in the same court of an issue of fact or law
after the verdict by a jury, a decision by the court or a report of a
referee. The trial court can grant a new trial on its own motion or an
appellate court can remand the matter for the trial court to rehear.
Usual grounds for a new trial are: errors of the court in rulings during
the trial or in charging the jury; misconduct of any party, juror, or
witness; newly discovered evidence which the party seeking the new
trial could not have discovered with due diligence; surprise which
prevented a party from adequately presenting their case; ineffective
assistance of counsel or any other irregularity which renders it probable
that an impartial trial had not been held.
TRIAL BY JURY see jury trial.
TRIAL BY RECORD a trial in which a party pleads that a record exists
supporting his or her claim, and the adversary denies the record’s
existence, or pleads NUL TIEL RECORD (no such record). If the record can
be produced, it is considered by the court in reaching a verdict. If it is
not produced, judgment is given to the adversary.
TRIAL DE NOVO historically described an appeal from a decision of a
court of chancery. It signifies a proceeding in which both issues of law
and issues of fact are reconsidered as if the original trial had never taken
place. Appeals from probate court or from minor courts, such as local
municipal courts, are often by trial de novo. New testimony may be
adduced or the matter may be determined de novo on the basis of the
evidentiary record already produced. When the trial de novo is “on the
record,” no new evidence is taken by the reviewing court, but a fresh
consideration of the law and facts is nevertheless undertaken without
deference to the decision reached in the initial trial.
TRIAL COURT court of original jurisdiction, where matters are to be
litigated first and where all evidence relative to a cause is received and
considered. All states differentiate between trial courts and appellate
courts. The distinction is that it is the function of the trial court first to
determine the facts and the law in a case, with the appellate court acting
predominantly as a court of review of law, but not fact.
TRIAL LIST see court calendar.
TRIBUNAL an officer or body having authority to adjudicate matters. See
administrative agency; court; forum; trial court.
TRIER OF FACT see fact finder.
TRIGGER LAWS laws which are presently unenforceable but may
achieve enforceability in the future. They contain both substantive
provisions, which would be held unconstitutional if presently
challenged, and a trigger provision, which would allow them to be
upheld by the courts if the change occurs. Examples would be making
all abortions illegal, requiring presidential elections to be decided by
popular vote, or prohibiting human cloning.
TRIPARTITE having three parts.
TRO temporary restraining order.
TROUBLED ASSET RELIEF PROGRAM see TARP.
TROVER an early common law tort action to recover damages for a
wrongful conversion of personal property or to recover actual
possession of such property. Originally, the action was limited to cases
in which lost property had been found and converted by the finder to
his or her own use. Later the action was expanded to include property
not actually lost and found, but only wrongly converted. Compare
detinue; replevin; tenancy [TENANCY AT SUFFERANCE]; trespass;
unlawful detainer.
TRUE BILL see indictment.
TRUST 1. an entity that holds assets (the res or corpus) for the benefit of
certain other persons or entities. The person holding legal title or
interest, who has responsibility for the assets and distribution of the
assets or distribution of the income generated by such assets, is the
trustee. The CESTUI QUE TRUST, or beneficiary, for whose benefit the
trust is created, holds the EQUITABLE TITLE (see title) or interest. 2. any
relationship in which one acts as guardian or fiduciary in relation to
another’s property. Thus, a deposit of money in a bank is a trust, or the
receipt of money to be applied to a particular purpose or to be paid to
another is a trust.
ACTIVE TRUST a trust in which the trustee has affirmative duties to
perform, requiring the exercise of sound personal discretion. Compare
PASSIVE TRUST (below).
BANK TRUST see TOTTEN TRUST (below).
BREACH OF TRUST see breach (of contract) [BREACH OF TRUST].
CESTUI QUE TRUST (S˘ES-TW¯E K¯A)— Old Fr.: beneficiary; one for whose
benefit the trust is created. The property given in trust is called the
subject matter, or trust res (or corpus).
CHARITABLE TRUST a trust created to advance some public purpose, such
as education, religion or science; also called a PUBLIC TRUST.
COMPANY see trust company.
COMPLEX TRUST a trust that under the instrument of its creation or
under state law may either distribute or retain income.
CONSTRUCTIVE TRUST [INVOLUNTARY TRUST] one that is found to exist
by operation of law or by construction of the court, regardless of lack
of express intent on the part of the parties. When one party has been
wrongfully deprived, either by mistake, fraud or some other breach of
faith, of some right, benefit or title to property, a court may impose
upon the present holder of legal title to that property a constructive trust
for the benefit of the wronged party. Thus, to prevent unjust
enrichment of the legal holder, such person is deemed to hold the
property as a trustee for the beneficial use of the party wrongfully
deprived of rights.
DECLARATION OF TRUST an instrument by which the owner of property
declares that he or she is holding that property in trust, thus making
himself or herself a trustee of the property. A declaration of trust
creates a valid trust of the property subject to it, even though the settlor
receives no consideration for declaring the trust, and even though the
property is not formally transferred. The settlor must only satisfy the
Statute of Frauds to create the trust, unless it is in substance a
testamentary disposition, in which case the Statute of Wills must be
satisfied.
DEED OF TRUST see deed of trust; trust deed.
DIRECT TRUST see EXPRESS [DIRECT] TRUST (below).
DISCRETIONARY TRUST a trust that gives the trustee the discretion to pay
to or apply for the benefit of the beneficiary so much or all of the trust
income or principal as the trustee deems appropriate. Compare
spendthrift trust.
DISTRIBUTION OF A TRUST see distribution [TRUST DISTRIBUTION].
EXPRESS TRUST [DIRECT TRUST] a trust created from the free and
deliberate act of the parties, including affirmative intention of the
settlor [the one granting the property] to set up the trust, usually
evidenced by some writing, deed or will.
FIXED INVESTMENT TRUST see nondiscretionary trust.
FUND see trust fund.
GENERATION-SKIPPING TRUST see generation-skipping transfer
[GENERATION-SKIPPING TRUST].
GRANTOR TRUST a trust that has beneficiaries other than the grantor but,
because of retention of certain interests or certain powers over the trust,
all income of the trust is taxed to the grantor.
IMPLIED TRUST one that is inferred from the parties’ transactions by
operation of law, in contrast to an EXPRESS TRUST that is created by the
parties’ deliberate acts or expression of intent. Implied trusts can be
either CONSTRUCTIVE or RESULTING.
INDENTURE see indenture; trust indenture.
INTER VIVOS TRUST a trust created during the grantor’s lifetime.
INVESTMENT TRUST see investment company.
INVOLUNTARY TRUST see CONSTRUCTIVE [INVOLUNTARY] TRUST (above).
LAND TRUST see land trust.
LIVING TRUST an inter vivos trust; a trust established and in operation
during the settlor’s life. Compare TESTAMENTARY TRUST.
MASSACHUSETTS TRUST see Massachusetts trust.
NONDISCRETIONARY TRUST see nondiscretionary trust.
ORAL TRUST see oral [ORAL TRUST].
PASSIVE TRUST a trust imposing no active duties on the trustee, but rather
the trustee merely holds legal title to the property. Under the Statute of
Uses, the legal estate in a passive trust rests in the beneficiary.
POUROVER TRUST a trust that either distributes assets to another trust, or
that receives assets from another trust or some other source.
PRECATORY TRUST one frequently created by a will, arising from words
of expectation, request or recommendation that are expressed therein.
Though they do not amount to actual directives, such words are
effective to create a trust so long as they are not so modified by the
context as to amount to no more than mere suggestions, to be acted
upon or not, according to the caprice of the supposed trustee.
PUBLIC TRUST see CHARITABLE TRUST (above).
REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST see real estate investment trust
[REIT].
RESULTING TRUST a trust arising by implication of law when it appears
from the nature of the transaction that it was the intention of the parties
to create a trust. Thus, a resulting trust involves the element of intent,
which though implied, makes it more like an EXPRESS TRUST. A
constructive trust, in contrast, is sometimes found contrary to the
parties’ intent, in order to work equity or frustrate fraud.
EXAMPLE: Kelly purchases a piece of land, but the purchase agreement
names a close friend as the purchaser. Since the friend is not considered
a natural object of Kelly’s affection, which is usually a family member
or relative, a presumption arises that Kelly did not make a gift to his
friend. Unless other evidence is shown to invalidate that presumption, a
court finds that the friend holds title to the property as a resulting trust for
Kelly.
SAVINGS ACCOUNT [BANK] TRUST see TOTTEN TRUST (below).
SIMPLE TRUST a trust required, by the terms of its creation or under state
law, to distribute all of its income currently.
SPENDTHRIFT TRUST see spendthrift trust.
TESTAMENTARY TRUST a trust that is established during the settlor’s life
but is contained in the settlor’s will and does not take effect until the
settlor’s death; created with the formalities necessary for a will.
TOTTEN TRUST a bank account established by a depositor who describes
himself or herself as trustee for another, other than a trustee under a
will, trust agreement, or court order. During the depositor’s lifetime, a
Totten trust is fully revocable; upon the depositor’s death, the account is
payable to the named beneficiary, subject to the claims of the
depositor’s creditors. The purpose of a Totten trust is to create a
testamentary substitute, i.e., a means of passing one’s money upon one’s
death other than by will. Totten trusts are statutorily recognized in some
states and are given various effect in others. Totten trusts are also
known as SAVINGS ACCOUNT [BANK] TRUSTS.
TRUSTEE see trustee.
TRUST INDENTURE ACT OF 1939 see securities acts [TRUST INDENTURE
ACT OF 1939].
TRUSTOR see trustor.
UNIT INVESTMENT TRUST see unit investment trust.
VOTING TRUST see voting trust.
TRUST CERTIFICATE an instrument issued to finance the purchase of
railroad equipment, under which the trustees hold title to the equipment
as security for the load.
TRUST COMPANY a financial organization that provides trust services
such as acting in the capacity of trustee, fiduciary or agent for both
individuals and companies; transfer agents are typically provided by
trust companies. Duties include administering trust funds, acting as
custodian for property held in trust, providing investment management
for trust funds, executing wills. Trust companies often engage in
banking activities as well, and are regulated by state law.
TRUST DEED see deed of trust.
TRUSTEE 1. one who holds legal title to property in trust for the benefit
of another person, and who is required to carry out specific duties with
regard to the property, or who has been given power affecting the
disposition of property for another’s benefit.
EXAMPLE: A father creates a trust for his children. He wants to control
the disposition of the money generated by the trust, so he names himself
as trustee. In that position, he can be sure that his desires in relation to the
trust are carried out.
2. also used loosely as anyone who acts as a guardian or fiduciary in
relationship to another, such as a public officer towards his or her
constituents, a state toward its citizens, or a partner to his or her
copartner.
TRUSTEE IN BANKRUPTCY an officer, elected and approved by the referee
or judge of a bankruptcy proceeding, who takes legal title to the
property or money of the bankrupt and holds it in trust for equitable
distribution among the bankrupt’s creditors.
TRUST FUND real property or personal property held in trust for the
benefit of another person; the corpus [res] of a trust.
TRUST INDENTURE an instrument that states the terms and conditions
of a trust, particularly a trust created as security for a bond issue.
TRUST INDENTURE ACT OF 1939 see Securities Acts [TRUST
INDENTURE ACT OF 1939].
TRUSTOR one who creates a trust; more often called the settlor.
TRUTH IN LENDING ACT a federal law, the provisions of which assure
individuals applying for commercial credit information relating to the
cost of credit, enabling them to decide which credit source offers them
the most favorable credit terms. Under this law, the commercial lender
must inform the borrower of the dollar amount of the interest charges
and the interest rate, computed on an annual basis according to the
specified formula, and must afford borrowers who pledge real property
as security for the loan a three-day period in which to rescind the
transaction.
EXAMPLE: A merchant allows his customers to buy goods on credit. He
does not force them to sign any papers evidencing the debt, but, in
return, he charges a fluctuating interest rate. This practice may violate
the Truth in Lending Act, and the merchant may be liable for penalties.
TRY TITLE to submit to judicial scrutiny the legitimacy of title to
property.
TSA see Department of Homeland Security [DHS] [TRANSPORTATION
SECURITY ADMINISTRATION [TSA]].
TUCKER ACT see Federal Claims Court [TUCKER ACT].
TURNTABLE DOCTRINE see attractive nuisance.
TURPITUDE see moral turpitude.
1231 ASSET see capital [§1231 ASSET].
TWO FUNDS DOCTRINE see marshaling [marshalling] [TWO FUNDS
DOCTRINE].
TWO PARTY CONSENT see wiretap [TWO PARTY CONSENT].
TYING ARRANGEMENT the sale of one product on the condition that
the purchaser also buy another product, or agree to not buy the other
product from anyone else. A tying agreement is a per se violation of the
Sherman Antitrust Act, in that it allows the seller to exploit his or her
control over the tying product to force the buyer into the purchase of a
tied product that the buyer either did not want at all or might have
preferred to purchase elsewhere on different terms. But, if a seller does
not possess sufficient market power to cause an actual adverse effect on
competition, a court will not find a tying arrangement and therefore the
per se rule will not apply. See antitrust laws.
U
UBI (u@’-be@) Lat.: where.
UBI SUPRA (u@-be@su@’prä) Lat.: where stated above.
UCC see Uniform Commercial Code [UCC].
UCCC see Uniform Consumer Credit Code [UCCC].
ULTIMATE FACTS the essential and determining facts on which the final
conclusion of law is predicated. They are facts deduced by inference
from evidentiary facts, which can be directly established by testimony
or evidence. Compare mediate data.
ULTRAHAZARDOUS ACTIVITY an uncommon activity, giving rise to
strict liability, that necessarily involves risk of serious harm to the
person, land or chattels of others.
EXAMPLE: As part of the demolition of a building, a construction
company uses various methods of blasting. These methods are
permitted even though they may cause damages elsewhere because of
the need to use explosive devices. But since blasting is an ultrahazardous
activity, the company must pay any damage that results, whether or not
the damage was forseeable.
ULTRA VIRES (u*l’-trä vĭ’-re*z) Lat.: beyond, in excess of powers. That which
is beyond the power authorized by law. 1. an action of a corporation
that is beyond the powers conferred upon it by its charter, or by the
statute under which it was created. 2. acts of public officials beyond
their authority. See quo warranto.
UNAVOIDABLE ACCIDENT see accident [UNAVOIDABLE ACCIDENT].
UNCLEAN HANDS one of the equitable maxims embodying the
principle that a party seeking redress in a court of equity (equitable
relief) must not have done any unethical act in the transaction upon
which that party maintains the action in equity, since a court of
conscience will not grant relief to one guilty of unconscionable
conduct, i.e., to one with unclean hands.
UNCONDITIONAL DISCHARGE see sentence [SUSPENDED SENTENCE].
UNCONDITIONAL PARDON see pardon [UNCONDITIONAL PARDON].
UNCONSCIONABLE so unreasonably detrimental to the interest of one
party to a contract as to render the contract unenforceable. The term
refers to a bargain so one-sided as to amount to an absence of
meaningful choice on the part of one of the parties (typically as a result
of greatly unequal bargaining power), together with contract terms
unreasonably favorable to the other party.
EXAMPLE: Renata needs money quickly to meet her monthly car
payments. She contracts with a company to work at extremely low
wages in return for their making her car payments. The contract may be
declared unconscionable because Renata entered into it in a distressed state
and the company took great advantage of her position.
UNCONSTITUTIONAL conflicting with some provision of the
Constitution. A statute found to be unconstitutional is considered void
or as if it had never been, and consequently all rights, contracts or
duties that depend on it are void. Similarly, no one can be punished for
having refused obedience to the law once it is found to be
unconstitutional.
UNCONTROLLABLE IMPULSE TEST see insanity
[UNCONTROLLABLE IMPULSE TEST].
UNDERAGE shortage; deficiency; an amount of money or goods actually
on hand falling short of the listed amount in the records. Also, being
below the legal age for voting, drinking, or consensual sexual activities.
UNDER COLOR OF LAW see color of law.
UNDER COLOR OF TITLE see color of title.
UNDERLEASE see sublease.
UNDER PROTEST the making of a payment or the doing of an act under
an obligation while reserving the right to object to the obli-gation at a
later date. Typically, a party will make the payment or perform the act,
but will at the same time inform the other party in writing that the
performance is under protest. The statement under protest, without prejudice,
with reservation of right, or the like will prevent an accord and satisfaction
and will prevent prejudice to the rights reserved.
UNDER SEAL see seal; specialty.
UNDER THE INFLUENCE see driving while intoxicated [DWI].
UNDER THE WILL, ELECTION see election under the will.
UNDERWRITE to insure the satisfaction of an obligation, such as by an
insurance contract or sale of bonds. To underwrite an insurance
contract is to act as the insurer, or assume the risk for the life or
property of another.
EXAMPLE: Nocturn Company transports highly flammable liquids across
the country. It locates an insurance company to underwrite an insurance
policy, thereby shifting the risk and consequences of an accident onto
another company. Nocturn will have to pay a high price for the
underwriting, and the insurance company may require frequent
supervision of Nocturn’s safety practices.
To underwrite a stock or bond issue is to insure the sale of stocks or
bonds by agreeing to buy the entire issue if they are not sold to the
public before a certain date.
UNDISCLOSED PRINCIPAL see principal [UNDISCLOSED PRINCIPAL].
UNDIVIDED INTEREST [RIGHT] that interest or right in property
owned by TENANTS IN COMMON, JOINT TENANTS or TENANTS BY THE
ENTIRETY (see tenancy), whereby each tenant has an equal right to
make use of and enjoy the entire property. An undivided interest may be
of only a fractional share, e.g., “an undivided one-quarter interest,” in
which case the holder is entitled to one quarter of all profits and sale
proceeds from the property but has a right to possession of the whole.
See partition; severalty.
UNDUE INFLUENCE influence of another that destroys the requisite free
will of a testator or donor and creates a ground for nullifying a will or
invalidating an improvident gift. The exercise of undue influence is
suggested by excessive insistence, superiority of will or mind, the
relationship of the parties or pressure on the donor or testator by any
other means to do what he or she is unable, practically, to refuse.
EXAMPLE: A mother has her son draft her will, which provides the son
with most of her estate. The son is also her attorney. If the two other
sons, both of whom had relationships with the mother equal to the
attorney’s, are virtually excluded from the mother’s will, most courts
will find undue influence on the part of the attorney and invalidate the gift
to him.
Compare duress. See unconscionable.
UNEARNED SURPLUS in finance, surplus not part of earned surplus. It
may include paid-in-surplus, REVALUATION SURPLUS, which arises upon
the revaluation of assets above their cost, or DONATED SURPLUS, which
arises from capital contributions other than for shares of stock.
UNETHICAL not ethical; not in accordance with the standards followed in
a business or a profession. See conflict of interest. See also Code of
Professional Responsibility and Model Rules of Professional
Conduct.
UNEXECUTED USE see use [UNEXECUTED USE].
UNFAIR COMPETITION 1. unfair, untrue or misleading advertising
likely to lead the public to believe that certain goods are associated with
another manufacturer; 2. imitating a competitor’s product, package or
trademark in circumstances where the consumer might be misled; 3.
representations or conduct that deceive the public into believing that the
business name, reputation or good will of one person is that of another.
Unfair competition is a tort and a fraud for which the courts afford a
remedy. Fraudulent or deceptive practices that are disparaging or
injurious to the trade of a competitor may be enjoined.
UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICE any activities by either a labor
organization (union) or an employer that are unlawful under the
National Labor Relations Act. Unions are specifically forbidden to
engage in the following activities: restraint or coercion of employees or
employers; coercion of employers to discriminate against employees;
refusal to bargain; coercion or inducement of strikes or boycotts for a
prohibited purpose; excessive or discriminatory initiation fees;
featherbedding; picketing for organizational purposes under certain
circumstances; in the health care industry, picketing or striking on less
than ten days’ notice.
Employers are specifically forbidden to engage in the following
activities: interference with employees in exercise of their rights;
domination of a labor organization; encouragement or discouragement
of membership in labor unions through discriminatory terms and
conditions of employment; discrimination against employees for filing
labor grievances or testifying in regard to them; refusal to bargain
collectively with the representative of a majority of the employees;
entering into contracts that discriminate against other employers. See
collective bargaining.
UNFIT unsuitable, incompetent, or not adapted for a particular use or
service. Compare warranty [WARRANTY OF FITNESS]. In the context of a
parent child relationshop the term unfit usually, although not necessarily,
imports something of moral delinquency.
UNIFIED ESTATE AND GIFT TAX see tax [UNIFIED ESTATE AND GIFT
TAX].
UNIFORM ARBITRATION ACT see arbitrator [UNIFORM ARBITRATION
ACT].
UNIFORM CODE OF MILITARY JUSTICE see military law
[(UNIFORM) CODE OF MILITARY JUSTICE].
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE [UCC] a code of laws governing
various commercial transactions, including the sale of goods, banking
transactions, secured transactions in personal property, and other
matters, that was designed to bring uniformity in these areas to the laws
of the various states, and that has been adopted, with some
modifications, in all states (except Louisiana) as well as in the District
of Columbia and in the Virgin Islands.
UNIFORM CONSUMER CREDIT CODE [UCCC] one of several
uniform laws that states may or may not adopt, the UCCC was passed
to simplify and further consumer understanding of all aspects of credit
and credit transactions and to encourage the development of sound
consumer credit practices. Sometimes called U3C.
UNIFORM GIFTS TO MINORS ACT [UGMA] a uniform law adopted
by every state that creates a statutory method for making a gift in trust
to minors.
The law usually applies only to certain types of personal property,
such as securities, annuity, life insurance and endowment policies,
partnership interests, or tangibles. The gift is made and the trust is
created by the donor either by registering the property in the name of
the custodian, followed by the language “as custodian for . . .” or by
delivering the property to the custodian together with a statement that
the property is to be held as custodian under the Uniform Gifts to
Minors Act. The statutes set forth the terms of the trust, under which the
custodian may apply the trust fund for the benefit of the minor and is
obliged to pay over the funds upon the minor attaining age 18, unless
the donor indicates at the time of the gift that it is to be held until age
21.
UNIFORM LAWS laws that have been approved by the Commis-sioners
on Uniform State Laws and are proposed to all state legislatures for
their consideration and adoption. Some uniform laws are passed by only
a few states; others are passed by all the states with minor differences in
language.
EXAMPLE: The Uniform Commercial Code, a uniform law, has been
adopted by almost all states, with some variations by several states. The
UCC governs banking and secured transactions, and sale of goods.
UNIFORM SYSTEM OF CITATION a legal citation guide of accepted
and standard rules of citation and style. Published by The Harvard Law
Review Association in updated editions. It is a guide to citations related
to cases, statutes, periodicals, debates, hearings, and other specific
forms of authority; known as the BLUE BOOK for its blue cover. Properly
cited briefs are said to be in blue book form.
UNIFORM TRADE SECRETS ACT see trade secrets [UNIFORM TRADE
SECRETS ACT].
UNILATERAL CONTRACT see contract [UNILATERAL CONTRACT].
UNILATERAL MISTAKE see mistake [UNILATERAL MISTAKE].
UNION see labor organization [union].
UNION SHOP a workplace where all the employees are members of a
union. Nonunion members may work in such shops provided they agree
to join the union.
UNIT see commercial unit.
UNITED STATES ATTORNEY see district attorney; prosecutor.
UNITED STATES CLAIMS COURT see Court of Claims.
UNITED STATES CODE the official codification of the federal statutes in
a multivolume bound set that is issued every six years and
supplemented during the intervening years. It is updated by the
supplement, United States Code Congressional and Administrative
News. The UNITED STATES CODE ANNOTATED (U.S.C.A.) includes case
notes, historical references, and cross-references.
UNITED STATES COURTS see federal courts.
UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE see magistrate [UNITED STATES
[FEDERAL] MAGISTRATE].
UNITED STATES TRUSTEE see bankruptcy [UNITED STATES TRUSTEE].
UNITIES the common law requirements necessary to create a JOINT
TENANCY or a TENANCY BY THE ENTIRETY (see tenancy). A joint tenancy
requires the four unities of interest, possession, time and title, and a
tenancy by the entirety requires, in addition to the four unities, unity of
person. Tenants in common, as a result of the kind of estate they hold,
have a unity of possession, but no unity is required to create such an
estate.
UNITY OF INTEREST the requirement that interests of the co-tenants in a
joint tenancy or tenancy by the entirety be equal. An individual joint
tenant cannot encumber his or her share by mortgage without
destroying this unity; to preserve the joint tenancy the mortgage must be
agreed to by all. Tenants in common are not subject to this unity of
interest rule and may have unequal shares in the same property. See
tenancy [TENANCY IN COMMON].
UNITY OF PERSON the common-law requirement for the creation of a
tenancy by the entirety that the co-tenants be husband and wife, based
on the conception that marriage created a unity of person.
UNITY OF POSSESSION the equal right of each co-owner of property to the
use and possession of the whole property.
UNITY OF TIME the requirement that the interests of the co-tenants in a
joint tenancy or tenancy by the entirety must commence (or vest) at the
same moment in time.
UNITY OF TITLE the requirement that all tenants of a joint tenancy or
both tenants of a tenancy by the entirety acquire their interests under the
same title. Thus, such co-tenants cannot hold by different deeds; their
interests are created by the same instrument or event.
UNIT INVESTMENT TRUST an unmanaged portfolio of bonds that is
sold to investors in units of $1,000 each. A bank or trust company
serves as custodian and trustee for the portfolio of bonds, and collects
and periodically disburses interest payments and principal when bonds
mature. Since the portfolio is fixed, the trust is self-liquidating because
of both unit holder redemptions and bond maturities. Compare
nondiscretionary trust.
UNIVERSAL AGENT an agent authorized to transact all the business of
his or her principal.
UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS an international
bill of rights adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1948
calling for specified rights and freedoms for all persons. See human
rights.
UNJUST ENRICHMENT gain or benefit that is the result of another’s
efforts or acts but for which that other has received no recompense, and
for which the one receiving the benefit has not paid. A person who is
deemed by law to have been unjustly enriched at the expense of another
is required to make restitution to the other. Restitution and unjust
enrichment are modern designations for the older doctrine of quasi
contracts, which are not true contracts, but are obligations created by the
law when money, property or services have been obtained by one
person at the expense of another under such circumstances that in
equity and good conscience he or she ought not retain it. The law then
may impose a duty to pay compensation in order to prevent unjust
enrichment.
EXAMPLE: Louie plants shrubbery under a contract with Kimani. Kimani
dies before Louie is paid, and Mia then buys Kimani’s house. Mia must
pay Louie for the shrubbery, for if she does not, she will be unjustly
enriched and Louie will be out the value of the plantings.
Compare quantum meruit.
UNLAWFUL ACT MANSLAUGHTER see manslaughter [UNLAWFUL
ACT MANSLAUGHTER].
UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY 1. a misdemeanor in common law consisting
of a meeting of several persons with a common plan that, if carried out,
would result in a riot; 2. a meeting of persons who intend to commit a
crime by open force; 3. a meeting to execute a common design, lawful
or unlawful, in an unauthorized manner that is likely to cause fear of a
BREACH OF THE PEACE (see breach). Compare association; conspiracy.
UNLAWFUL DETAINER the act of holding possession without right, as
in the case of a tenant whose lease has expired. UNLAWFUL DETAINER
STATUTES often create a right to oust, by summary process, a holdover
tenant and to determine speedily the landlord’s right to possession of
real property. The summary proceeding determines only the question
of possession; no ultimate determination of title or estate can be made
in such a proceeding. See tenancy [TENANCY AT SUFFERANCE]. See
detainer; forcible entry.
UNLAWFUL [ENEMY] COMBATANT see enemy combatant.
UNLAWFUL ENTRY the statutory crime of entering onto someone else’s
property without their consent by fraud or force. Unlawful entry is
broader than and should be distinguished from the common law crime
of burglary that requires the breaking and entry of the dwelling of
another at night and with felonious intent. Statutes prohibiting unlawful
entry were passed to protect society from acts not prohibited by
burglary. See trespass.
UNLAWFUL FORCE see force [UNLAWFUL FORCE].
UNLIQUIDATED see sum certain [UNLIQUIDATED].
UNLISTED SECURITY a stock or bond that is not listed on a stock
exchange and is therefore traded only in the over-the-counter market.
UNNATURAL ACT [OFFENSE] see crime against nature.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP in zoning law, a permissible ground for a
variance. Unnecessary hardship exists when the physical characteristics
of the real estate are such that it cannot be used for a permitted purpose,
or that it can only be used for a permitted purpose at a prohibitive
expense.
UNREALIZED APPRECIATION see appreciation [UNREALIZED
APPRECIATION].
UNREASONABLE arbitrary, capricious, absurd, immoderate, or
exorbitant; not conformable to reason, irrational, beyond bounds of
reason or moderation.
UNREASONABLE PUNISHMENT see cruel and unusual punishment.
UNREASONABLE RESTRAINT OF TRADE see restraint of trade.
UNREASONABLE SEARCH AND SEIZURE a search and/or seizure of
a person, a house, papers or effects that are protected against it by the
Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments and state constitutions, where
the basis for the search and/or seizure does not meet constitutional
requirements.
EXAMPLE: An officer receives an anonymous tip that Samir is growing
marijuana in his house. The officer waits until Samir leaves his house,
and then the officer enters through an open window. Since the entry was
conducted without a warrant and without probable cause, the search and
seizure would be found unreasonable and evidence obtained thereby would
be suppressed and would not be used to prove that Samir had marijuana
in his house.
UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT see cruel and unusual punishment.
UP [PLUS] TICK indicates that the latest trade in a stock is at a higher
price than the previous trade. A ZERO-PLUS TICK is a trade at the last
price with the preceding different price registered as an up tick.
UPZONING see zoning [UPZONING].
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE designated zones in a state which allow
the charging of a significantly lower sales tax to buyers. Such zones are
designed to revitalize otherwise blighted communities by encouraging
sales and thereby the creation of jobs. A UEZ may also allow tax free
purchases of equipment for the business, energy sales tax exemptions
and tax credits as well as other state financial assistance to the business.
URL see domain [URL].
USAGE OF TRADE see trade usage.
USCIS see Citizenship And Immigration Services [USCIS].
USE the right to enjoy the benefits flowing from real property or personal
property; equitable ownership as distinct from legal title. Historically
in the law of property the term referred to every form of beneficial
ownership enforceable in the courts of chancery. Historically, uses have
been created by provision in a deed, by implication to the conveyer
when property is transferred without consideration [called a RESULTING
USE]; by bargain and sale deed or by a covenant to stand seised. Under
the Statute of Uses, the party in whom a use was created was deemed to
be the owner of legal title to a like estate as he had in the use; hence “A
to B for the use of C for life” was operative under the statute to convey
to C a life estate.
An important effect of the Statute of Uses was the validation at law
of executory interests (a species of future interests) that had
previously been recognized only in equity. A SHIFTING USE is a use that
arises in derogation of another, i.e., shifts from one beneficiary to
another, depending on some future contingency. A SPRINGING USE is a
use that arises upon the occurrence of a future event and that does not
take effect in derogation of any interest other than one that results to the
grantor, or remains in him or her in the meantime. Thus, a shifting use is
one that cuts short a prior use estate in a person other than the conveyor;
a springing use is one that cuts short a use estate in the conveyor.
In patent law, use refers to the rights of the licensee of the patent.
BENEFICIAL USE see beneficial use.
CESTUI QUE USE see cestui que [CESTUI QUE USE].
CONFORMING USE see conforming use.
EXCLUSIVE USE in real property law, one of the elements of a
prescriptive easement. Exclusive use in this regard means that the
rights of the party claiming the easement do not depend upon similar
rights in others. Exclusive use does not mean that no other persons have
physically used the property in question. In trademark law, exclusive use
refers to the exclusive use of both a specific mark or symbol and of any
confusingly similar mark or term.
FAIR USE see fair use.
PERMISSIVE USE use with the knowledge or consent of the owner; a
license terminable at the will of the owner or when the acts
contemplated in the permission are completed.
PUBLIC USE see public use.
USE IMMUNITY see self-incrimination, privilege against [TESTIMONIAL
[USE] IMMUNITY].
USES, STATUTE OF see Statute of Uses.
USE TAX see tax [USE TAX].
USEFUL LIFE see depreciation [USEFUL LIFE].
USE IMMUNITY see self-incrimination, privilege against.
USE, PUBLIC see public use.
USICE see Immigration And Customs Enforcement [ICE].
USUFRUCT in civil law, the right to use and enjoy property vested in
another, and to draw from it all the profit and utility it may produce,
provided it be without altering the substance of the thing. See beneficial
use.
USURIOUS CONTRACT a contract that imposes interest on a debt at a
rate in excess of that permitted by law. See loansharking; usury.
USURY an unconscionable or exorbitant rate of interest; an excessive and
illegal requirement of compensation for forbearance on a debt; a
bargain under which a greater profit than is permitted by law is paid, or
is agreed to be paid, to a creditor by or on behalf of the debtor for a
loan of money, or for extending the maturity of a pecuniary debt. The
state legislatures today determine the maximum allowable rates of
interest that may be demanded in any financial transaction.
EXAMPLE: Darrell needs money but cannot obtain a loan from a bank. A
close friend agrees to lend him what he needs but at an interest rate over
the maximum allowed by law. Darrell agrees to the arrangement and in
fact does not think it unfair. Still, the friend is guilty of usury and can be
prosecuted for usury if the rate reaches a criminal level, which varies in
each state. The friend may also be made to return any interest he has
received. More importantly, the usurious rate of interest, and in some
jurisdictions the debt as well, is not enforceable against Darrell in the
event he has failed to make payments.
UTILITY see public utility.
UTMOST CARE the highest degree of care. In tort law, such a degree of
care as would be exercised by a very careful, prudent, and competent
person under the same or similar circumstances. See negligence.
UTMOST RESISTANCE the degree of resistance that a woman
traditionally has been required to offer her attacker in order to charge
that she has been raped; the maximum resistance of which a woman is
capable in resisting rape.
UTTER to put forth, to execute; especially, to offer, whether accepted or
not, a forged instrument with representations by words or acts, directly
or indirectly, that the instrument is valid.
UTTERANCE, EXCITED see excited utterance.
UXOR see et ux.
V
V. abbreviation for 1. versus, the Latin for “against.” Also abbreviated as
“vs.” however “v.” is preferred. Used in case captioning such as “Roe v.
Wade” to indicate the parties involved in a lawsuit. 2. volume. 3. verb.
VACATE 1. to render void; to set aside; 2. to move out; to render vacant.
VAGRANCY general term for a class of minor offenses such as idleness
without visible means of support, loitering, wandering around from
place to place without any lawful purpose.
VAGUENESS see void for vagueness.
VALUABLE CONSIDERATION see consideration [VALUABLE
CONSIDERATION].
VALUATION determination of the worth of real or personal property. See
appraise; book value; face value; market value.
VALUE the monetary worth of a thing; marketable price; estimated or
assessed worth. The method of determining an object’s value will vary
depending upon the purpose for which it is being determined. For
instance, for estate and gift tax purposes, value is the price a willing
buyer would pay a willing seller if neither is compelled to buy or sell
and both have reasonable knowledge of the relevant facts. However, for
insurance purposes, value may refer to REPLACEMENT VALUE, that is, the
cost of replacing an object, rather than its fair market value. See book
value; capitalized value; cash surrender value; diminution in value;
face value; going concern value; net asset value; par value;
probative [PROBATIVE VALUE].
VALUE ADDED TAX see tax [AD VALOREM TAX].
VANDALISM see bias crime; criminal mischief.
VARIABLE NUMBER OF TANDEM REPEATS [VNTR] see DNA
testing [SHORT TANDEM REPEATS [STR]].
VARIABLE RATE MORTGAGE see mortgage [ADJUSTABLE RATE
MORTGAGE].
VARIANCE 1. in procedure, a discrepancy between what is charged or
alleged and what is proved or offered as proof. A FATAL VARIANCE is, in
both civil and criminal cases, a material and substantial variance: in
criminal cases, it must also tend to mislead the defendant in making his
or her defense, or tend to expose the defendant to the injury of double
jeopardy.
EXAMPLE: Neerja files a lawsuit against a package delivery service for
damaging a package they delivered to her. At the trial, she offers proof
to show that she never received the package. The difference between her
original claim and the claim that she offers to prove constitutes a fatal
variance, and Neerja’s case will probably be dismissed.
2. in zoning law, an exemption from the application of a zoning
ordinance or regulation permitting a use that varies from that otherwise
permitted. The exception is granted by the appropriate authority in
special circumstances to protect against undue hardship wrought by
strict enforcement. See nonconforming use.
VASSAL at common law, a person who was granted real property in
return for a promise to perform services for his or her grantor or lord.
For instance, the king of England was the lord of the country and
granted land to his nobles; the nobles were then obligated to perform
various feudal services for the king, and were vassals to him. Upon a
vassal’s failure to perform the required services, the property reverted to
the lord. While the nobles were vassals of the king, they also could
grant land in return for feudal services, and thus be lords to other
vassals. See subinfeudation. The abuses of the feudal system led the
term to acquire a meaning similar to slave.
VEIL, PIERCING see piercing the corporate veil.
VEL NON (ve*l no*n) Lat.: or not.
VENAL dishonest; readily bribed or corrupted.
VEND the habit of selling and exposing to sale; to transfer to another for a
pecuniary equivalent.
VENDEE buyer, especially in a contract for the sale of realty.
VENDOR seller, especially person who sells real property.
VENDOR’S LIEN the right to enforce payment of the purchase price by
suit against the vendee’s equitable estate.
VENIRE (ve*-ne@’-ra@) Lat.: to come. Refers to the common law process by
which jurors are summoned to try a case.
VENIRE DE NOVO (da@no@’-vo@) Lat.: to come anew. Refers to summoning of a
second jury for the purpose of proceeding to a second trial. Such a
second trial is awarded where a verdict (by the jury) or finding (by the
court) is so defective or ambiguous upon its face that no judgment can
be rendered upon it. The term is sometimes used simply to denote a new
trial.
VENUE a neighborhood, a neighboring place; synonym for place of trial;
refers to the possible or proper place for trial of a suit, among several
places where jurisdiction could be established. Venue essentially
involves the right of the party sued to have the action heard in a
particular judicial district, for reasons of convenience. In a criminal trial
where publicity surrounding the crime would virtually preclude fair
trial, the court will direct a CHANGE OF VENUE, or removal of the
proceedings to a different district or county. See forum non
conveniens.
VERACITY honesty, truthfulness. See witness [CHARACTER WITNESS].
Compare credibility.
VERBOTEN forbidden, prohibited, banned.
VERDICT the opinion rendered by a jury, or a judge where there is no
jury, on a question of fact. A verdict differs from a judgment in that a
verdict is not a judicial determination, but rather a finding of fact that
the trial court may accept or reject and utilize in formulating its
judgment.
COMPROMISE VERDICT a verdict resulting from improper surrender of
one juror’s opinion to another on a material issue.
DIRECTED VERDICT see directed verdict.
FALSE VERDICT a manifestly unjust verdict; one not true to the
evidence, arrived at by any process (such as a coin flip or a quotient
verdict) that departs from the legitimate methods by which jurors may
reach a decision. When such a verdict is rendered, the court can enter a
judgment n.o.v. (“notwithstanding the verdict”).
GENERAL VERDICT ordinary verdict declaring simply which party
prevails, without any special findings of fact.
PARTIAL VERDICT in criminal law, a finding that the defendant is guilty
of certain charges but innocent of others.
QUOTIENT VERDICT improper and unacceptable kind of compromise
verdict resulting from an agreement by the jurors that their verdict will
be an award of damages in an amount to be determined by the addition
of all jurors’ computations of damages and its division by the number of
jurors.
SPECIAL VERDICT one rendered on certain specific factual issues posed
by the court. The special verdict requires the jury to make a specific
finding on each ultimate fact put in issue by the pleadings rather than a
general finding for one party or the other. The court will then apply the
law to those found facts.
VERIFICATION confirmation of correctness or authenticity of pleading
or other paper affidavit, oath or deposition; an affidavit attached to a
statement insuring the truth of that statement.
VERSUS against. The preferred abbreviation is “v.” (especially in the
captioning of a case, such as Gideon v. Wainwright), but “vs.” is also
used.
VERTICAL MERGER see merger [VERTICAL MERGER].
VERTICAL PRICE FIXING see price fixing [VERTICAL PRICE FIXING].
VERTICAL PRIVITY see privity [VERTICAL PRIVITY].
VESTED fixed, accrued or absolute; not contingent; generally used to
describe any right or title to something that is not dependent upon the
occurrence or failure to occur of some specified future event
(CONDITION PRECEDENT—see condition).
VESTED ESTATE a property interest that either is presently in possession
or will necessarily come into possession in the future merely upon the
determination, or end, of the preceding estate.
EXAMPLE: A mother conveys a house to her son, who will keep it until he
has his first child, at which time the house is to pass to her daughter. Not
until the son’s child is born can it be determined whether the daughter
will get the house. But immediately upon the birth, the daughter’s
interest in the house vests, giving rise to a vested estate.
VESTED INTEREST a present right or title to a thing that carries with it an
existing right of alienation, even though the right to possession or
enjoyment may be postponed to some uncertain time in the future.
VESTED REMAINDER a remainder that is limited to an ascertained person
whose right to the estate is fixed, certain and not dependent upon the
happening of any future event, but whose enjoyment of the estate is
postponed to some future time.
VESTED RIGHTS in relation to constitutional guarantees, a broad shield of
protection that consists of a vested interest that the government should
in equity recognize and protect, and of which the individual could not
be deprived arbitrarily without injustice. The term is frequently used to
designate rights that have become so fixed that the owner cannot be
deprived of them without his consent.
VETO see pocket veto.
VEXATIOUS LITIGATION civil action shown to have been instituted
maliciously and without probable cause, and that may be protected
against by injunction. See litigious; malicious prosecution.
VIATICAL SETTLEMENT assignment, transfer, or sale of a life
insurance policy’s death benefit to another for substantially less than the
full death benefit value where the policy owner has a terminal illness
and is thereby able to recover some monetary value to provide for his or
her immediate needs.
VICARIOUS LIABILITY liability imputed to one person for the actions
of another, where the law contemplates that the other should be held
responsible for a wrong in fact committed by someone else. Sometimes
this doctrine is called IMPUTED LIABILITY.
EXAMPLE: Mekhi drives a truck for Speedy Delivery Service. While
pulling out of a driveway, he hits a pedestrian. Speedy will be vicariously
liable for the pedestrian’s injuries under the doctrine of respondeat
superior.
EXAMPLE: Taye agrees to drive the getaway car in a robbery. Donna, who
enters the bank, kills a teller during the robbery. In most states, Taye is
vicariously liable for the killing.
Compare strict liability.
VICE CRIMES activities such as gambling, prostitution, and pornography
that are illegal because they offend the moral standards of the
community.
VICINAGE neighborhood; vicinity. Contemporary meaning denotes a
particular area where a crime was committed, where a trial is being
held, or from which jurors are called.
VICTUALS prepared food; food ready to eat.
VICTUALER [VICTUALLER] one who sells food or drink prepared for
consumption on the premises.
VIDELICET see viz.
VIDUITATE [VIDUITY] widowhood.
VI ET ARMIS see trespass [TRESPASS VI ET ARMIS].
VIEW see plain view. See also lineup; show up.
VILLEIN SOCAGE see socage.
VILLENAGE a menial form of feudal tenure in which the tenant [the
villein] was required to perform all services demanded by the lord of
the manor.
VIOLATION OF PROBATION see probation [VIOLATION OF
PROBATION].
VIOLENCE [VIOLENT] moving, acting, or characterized by physical
force, especially by extreme and sudden or unjust or improper force.
The degree of force implied by the word violence depends upon the
context in which it is used. For instance, its use in an insurance policy
may imply a lesser degree or a different type of force than its use in a
criminal statute.
VIR (vĭr) Lat.: man.
VIRTUAL REPRESENTATION representation in a lawsuit without
being named as a party. A type of class action where nonparty
members have a close relationship to the named parties and have similar
interests such that a judgment is binding upon the nonparties. A
preferable alternative is the appointment of a guardian ad litem to
ensure that the nonparty interests will be adequately protected.
VISA a recognition of the validity of a passport; issued by proper officials
of the country that the bearer wishes to enter; more broadly, a symbol
made on a document certifying that it has been examined and approved.
VISITATION, CONJUGAL see conjugal rights [CONJUGAL VISITATION].
VISITATION RIGHTS in family law, the right granted by a court to a
parent or other relative who is deprived custody of a child to visit the
child on a regular basis.
VIS MAJOR (vĭz mä-yôr’) Lat.: a greater force. In civil law denotes an act of
God, an irresistible natural cause that cannot be guarded against by
ordinary exertions of skill and prudence. Once treated as equivalent to
act of God, vis major now includes any insuperable interference.
VITALIZED see quickening.
VITIATE to void; to render a nullity; to impair.
VIZ (vĭz) Lat.: namely; that is to say; abbreviation of the Latin videlicet.
Used in pleadings to specify or explain what goes before it.
VOICE EXEMPLAR a recording of a person’s voice made for the purpose
of identification, usually in a criminal investigation. The Supreme Court
has held that requiring a person to make a voice exemplar does not
violate the privilege against self-incrimination, since it is used for
identification purposes only, and that it does not constitute an
unreasonable search or seizure.
VOID empty, having no legal force, incapable of being ratified.
VOIDABLE capable of being later annulled; refers to a valid act that,
though it may be rendered void, may accomplish the thing sought unless
or until the defect in the transaction has been effectively asserted or
judicially ascertained and declared.
VOIDABLE PREFERENCE see preference [VOIDABLE PREFERENCE].
VOID FOR VAGUENESS a doctrine that renders a criminal statute
unconstitutional and unenforceable when it is so vague that persons of
common intelligence must guess at its meaning and differ about its
application. A statute is void when it is vague about either what persons
are within the scope of the statute, what conduct is forbidden or what
punishment may be imposed. The principle derives from the
requirement of the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment that
criminal statutes give reasonably certain notice that an act has been
made criminal before the act is committed and a person is charged with
a crime for having so acted.
VOID, NULL AND see nullity.
VOID ON ITS FACE see void for vagueness.
VOIR DIRE (vwo*r de@r) Fr.: to speak the truth. 1. A VOIR DIRE EXAMINATION
by the court or by the attorneys of prospective jurors is to determine
their qualification for jury service, to determine if there is cause to
challenge (i.e., to excuse) particular jurors, and to provide information
about the jurors so that the parties can exercise their statutory
peremptory challenges (objections to particular jurors without need to
state cause).
EXAMPLE: A doctor is on trial for performing an abortion. In a voir dire
examination of potential jurors by counsel or the court, it is revealed
that a prospective juror has strong religious beliefs concerning abortions
that would bias any possibility of a fair and independent judgment. That
juror will most likely not be used at the doctor’s trial.
2. A voir dire examination during the trial refers to a hearing by the
court out of the presence of the jury upon some issue of fact or law that
requires an initial determination by the court or upon which the court
must rule as a matter of law alone.
VOLENTI NON FIT INJURIA (vo@-le*n’-te@no*n fe@t ĭn ju@’-re@-aw) Lat.: the volunteer
suffers no wrong. No legal wrong is done to one who consents. In tort
law, the principle that usually damages cannot be claimed by one who
has consented to the activity that caused the damages.
VOLUNTARY APPEARANCE see appearance [VOLUNTARY
APPEARANCE].
VOLUNTARY COMMITMENT see commitment [VOLUNTARY].
VOLUNTARY DISABLEMENT see anticipatory breach.
VOLUNTARY DISSOLUTION see dissolution [VOLUNTARY
DISSOLUTION].
VOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER see manslaughter [VOLUNTARY
MANSLAUGHTER].
VOLUNTARY NONSUIT see nonsuit [VOLUNTARY NONSUIT].
VOLUNTARY WASTE see waste [VOLUNTARY WASTE].
VOTER OWNED ELECTIONS see clean elections.
VOTING see cumulative voting.
VOTING RIGHT the right of a common shareholder to vote in person or
by proxy on the affairs of a company.
VOTING RIGHTS ACT the federal law passed in 1965 to effectuate the
right of each citizen to vote under the Fifteenth Amendment to the
U.S. Constitution. The law prohibits imposition of any qualification,
prerequisite to voting or practice or procedure by any state or political
subdivision to deny or abridge the right of any U.S. citizen to vote
because of race or color. The law forbids restrictions, such as literacy,
on the right to vote.
VOTING TRUST The accumulation in a single hand, or in a few hands, of
shares of corporate stock belonging to many owners, for the purpose of
exercising control over the business of the company. A device whereby
two or more shareholders divorce the voting rights of their stock from
its ownership, retaining their ownership but transferring their voting
rights to trustees in whom the voting rights of all the depositors in the
trust are pooled.
VOUCHER a document or receipt showing a payment. Also, an
authorization for a disbursement.
VS. see v.
W
WAGE EARNER’S PLAN see bankruptcy [WAGE EARNER’S PLAN].
WAGE, MINIMUM see minimum wage.
WAGER OF LAW under early English law, the giving of a pledge or
surety by a defendant to appear in court with the required number of
compurgators [character witnesses] who would testify that they
believed the defendant to be telling the truth. The number of
compurgators was usually 11 but could vary. The form of the oath they
had to recite was very strict. If one of them used the wrong word, the
oath “burst” and the plaintiff won. In England, this procedure had
largely died out by the thirteenth century but was still used occasionally
as late as the eighteenth century in cases of debt and detinue.
Compurgation originally became the accepted mode of trial adapted
to members of the church when the duel and ordeal lost favor. The
defendant would then be expected to bring a required number of priests
and/or kinsmen as compurgators because they should best know the
defendant’s character. Later, for practical reasons, neighbors became
acceptable compurgators. The compurgators were not witnesses but
merely expressed their confidence in the veracity of the defendant;
therefore, a comparative value was attached to their oaths. For example,
the oath of one competent witness may have outweighed the oaths of six
compurgators. The defense of wager of law was much abused. Since it
was only available in actions of debt, the courts permitted the creditor to
sue in assumpsit, an action in which that defense was not available.
WAGNER ACT see labor organization [union]; National Labor
Relations Act; Taft-Hartley Act.
WAIT see lying in wait.
WAITING PERIOD generally, any period of time that must expire before
a party may attempt to pursue legal rights. For instance, most states
require a waiting period after a blood test or the issuance of a marriage
license before a marriage may occur. A waiting period may be
unconstitutional if it interferes with a citizen’s right to travel freely. For
instance, a law requiring that a person be a resident of the state for one
year before he or she may be eligible for welfare benefits was held
unconstitutional on that ground. See also red herring [WAITING
PERIOD].
WAIVER an intentional and voluntary surrender of some known right,
which generally may either result from an express agreement or be
inferred from circumstances. See informed consent.
EXAMPLE: Spencer enters into a plea bargain with the prosecutor in the
hope that he will receive a lighter sentence. Since the plea represents an
admission of guilt and a waiver of the right to a jury trial, the judge must
be sure that Spencer realizes the consequences of his actions. Therefore,
the judge will inform Spencer that he has a right to have a trial and that
there is no guarantee that a plea will necessarily result in any different
sentence than from a trial. Without these precautions, the judge cannot
be sure that Spencer’s waiver is knowing and intelligent.
EXECUTORY WAIVER one that affects a still unperformed duty of the
other party to a contract.
IMPLIED WAIVER the waiver of substantial rights based upon the conduct
of the waiving party. For an implied waiver to occur, the party alleging
the waiver must have acted in detrimental reliance on the conduct
constituting the waiver, and the conduct relied upon must demonstrate a
clear, decisive, and unequivocal purpose to waive the legal rights
involved. Compare estoppel.
WANT OF CONSIDERATION see consideration [WANT OF
CONSIDERATION].
WANT OF PROSECUTION see prosecution [WANT OF PROSECUTION].
WANTON grossly negligent or careless; with a reckless disregard of
consequences.
WARD 1. a person whom the law regards as incapable of managing his or
her own affairs, and over whom or over whose property a guardian is
appointed. 2. one of the sections into which a town is divided for
educational or election purposes.
WARDSHIP the office of guardian. At common law, a form of
guardianship. The guardian was entitled to the wardship of a male heir
who was under age 21, or a female under age 14. The guardian had
custody of both the body and the lands of the heir, and was not required
to account to the heir for the profits derived from the land.
WAREHOUSEMAN’S LIEN see lien [WAREHOUSEMAN’S LIEN].
WAREHOUSE RECEIPT a receipt issued by a person (bailee) engaged in
the business of storing goods for hire. A warehouse receipt constitutes a
document of title under the Uniform Commercial Code, which
evidences that the person in possession of the document is entitled to
receive, hold, and dispose of the document and the goods it covers. A
warehouse receipt may be a negotiable instrument, depending upon its
terms.
WARRANT a written order from a competent authority directing the
doing of a certain act, especially one directing the arrest of a person or
persons, issued by a court, body or official. See also bench warrant;
search warrant.
The word warrant is also used in commercial and property law to
refer to a particular kind of guarantee or assurance about the quality and
validity of what is being conveyed or sold.
ARREST WARRANT an order of a court directing the sheriff or other
officer to seize a particular person to answer a complaint or otherwise
appear before the court. If a defendant fails to appear as required in
court, the judge will issue a bench warrant for arrest. For less serious
offenses, it is common to issue a summons in lieu of an arrest warrant.
An arrest warrant is constitutionally required to enter a person’s home to
effect an arrest except in exigent circumstances such as hot (fresh)
pursuit. See arrest; search and seizure. Compare warrantless arrest.
BENCH WARRANT see bench warrant.
GENERAL WARRANT see search warrant [GENERAL WARRANTS].
SEARCH WARRANT an order that certain premises or property be searched
for particularized items which if found are to be seized and used as
evidence in a criminal trial or destroyed as contraband. See search and
seizure; search warrant.
STOCK WARRANT a certificate that gives the holder the right to purchase
shares of stock for a specified price and within a specified time. Unlike
subscription rights, stock warrants offer the holder the right to
purchase shares of a different kind from those already held. Thus a
holder of common stock may purchase preferred stock. Stock warrants
usually originate as a bonus with new issues of bonds, notes or
preferred stock where they serve as an inducement to the buyer.
Warrants so offered come attached to the new security and usually
cannot be separated for a short period; once separated, the warrants can
be traded like any other security.
WARRANT TO SATISFY JUDGMENT an authorization issued by the
judgment creditor’s attorney to the clerk of the court directing the clerk
to enter a satisfaction of the judgment in the official court records.
WARRANTLESS ARREST an arrest made without a warrant. At
common law, an officer was justified in making an arrest without a
warrant if the officer reasonably believed that the defendant had
committed a misdemeanor in his or her presence or had committed any
felony. There is a constitutional preference for arrest upon a warrant,
however, and the Supreme Court has held that a warrantless arrest will
be judged by a somewhat higher standard of probable cause than if the
same arrest had occurred under the direction of a neutral and detached
magistrate. While warrantless arrests in public places have been upheld,
an arrest in a private residence requires an arrest warrant unless there
are exigent circumstances. See search and seizure; warrant [ARREST
WARRANT].
WARRANTY an assurance by one party to a contract of the existence of
a fact upon which the other party may rely, intended precisely to relieve
the promisee of any duty to ascertain the fact for himself or herself;
amounts to a promise to indemnify the promisee for any loss if the fact
warranted proves untrue. Such warranties are made either overtly
(EXPRESS WARRANTIES) or by implication (IMPLIED WARRANTIES).
A COVENANT OF WARRANTY in real property is a covenant running
with the land, insuring the continuing validity of title.
BREACH OF WARRANTY see breach [BREACH OF WARRANTY]
WARRANTY OF FITNESS a warranty that the goods are suitable for the
special purpose of the buyer, which will not be satisfied by mere fitness
for general purposes.
EXAMPLE: Constant Trucking Company orders a specially enforced truck
for a new type of service it is starting. Constant places the order with a
dealership with whom it has often worked in the past, and explains the
need and purpose for the vehicle. The vehicle is delivered to Constant,
which finds after one shipment that the truck is not built as specified. A
warranty of fitness, which either is written in the contract between
Constant and the dealer or is implied, has been breached. Constant can
return the truck and demand its money back.
WARRANTY OF HABITABILITY a promise by the landlord that at the
inception of a residential lease there are no latent defects in facilities
vital to the use of the premises for residential purposes, and that these
facilities will remain in usable condition for the duration of the lease.
WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY a warranty that the goods are
reasonably fit for the general purposes for which they are sold.
WARRANTY ACT see Magnuson-Moss Warranty Act.
WARRANTY DEED a deed that warrants that the grantor has the title he
or she claims to have. It purports to convey property free and clear of all
encumbrances. As a guarantee of title, the warranty deed creates
liability in the grantor if the title transferred is defective. Compare
quitclaim deed.
WASH SALE a sale or other disposition of stock or securities as to which
no loss is recognized for tax purposes, because within 30 days before or
after the date of sale or disposition the taxpayer purchased substantially
identical stock or securities.
WASTE generally, an act, by one in rightful possession of land who has
less than a fee simple interest in the land, which decreases the value of
the land or the owner’s interest or the interest of another who has a
future interest in the land (such as a remainderman, lessor, mortgagee,
reversioner).
AMELIORATING WASTE a change in the physical structure of the occupied
premises by an unauthorized act of the tenant that, though technically
waste, in fact increases the value of the land.
ECONOMIC WASTE in the law of oil and gas, a production practice that, in
light of alternatives, reduces net value of hydrocarbons that may be
produced from a reservoir.
EQUITABLE WASTE such acts as at law would not be deemed to be waste
under the circumstances of the case but that in the view of a court of
equity are so viewed because of their manifest injury to the property,
although they are not inconsistent with the legal rights of the party
committing them.
PERMISSIVE WASTE injury to the inheritance caused by the tenant’s
failure to make the expected reasonable repairs to the premises.
PHYSICAL WASTE in the law of oil and gas, a production practice that, in
light of alternatives, reduces the quantity of hydrocarbons that may be
produced from a reservoir.
VOLUNTARY WASTE injury to the inheritance caused by an affirmative act
of the tenant.
WASTING ASSET an asset that will be consumed through its use;
property exhausted over a period of years through the progressive loss
of value or consumption of the property. For instance, a coal mine is a
wasting asset, since it contains a limited amount of coal that will be
exhausted by regular mining activity.
WATERED STOCK a stock issue that is offered to public investors by
founders and promoters of a company at a greatly inflated price
compared to book value or cost; stock that a company issues for
property that is worth less than the stock. Stock may be identified as
watered stock by comparison of market or offering value to net asset
value of a share.
WATERS see territorial waters.
WATER TABLE the distance between the surface of the land and the depth
where natural water is located. Used in determining the possibility of
and cost of drilling a well.
WAY, RIGHT OF see right of way.
WEAPON see dangerous weapon [instrumentality]; deadly weapon;
force; gun control law.
WEIGHT OF THE EVIDENCE a phrase that indicates the relative value
of the totality of evidence presented on one side of a judicial dispute,
compared to the evidence presented on the other side; refers to the
persuasiveness of the testimony of the witnesses.
WESTLAW see search engine.
WHEN ISSUED short for “when, as and if issued,” which is a conditional
trading basis for a new stock or bond issue that has been authorized for
issuance but does not actually exist. WHEN ISSUED SECURITIES can be
bought or sold like ordinary securities, except that transactions do not
settle until the actual security is formally issued and the stock exchange
involved or the National Association of Securities Dealers decides on a
specific settlement date. The most common occasion for when issued
trading is in connection with stock splits. After the split is announced
but before the new shares issue, the split stock may be traded on a when
issued basis. Such trading has speculative appeal since a down payment
of only 25 percent is required and since no margin or loan debt is
required for the balance until settlement date, which might be weeks in
the future.
WHIPLASH INJURY neck injury commonly associated with rear-end
automobile collisions. Caused by a sudden, unexpected forced forward
movement of the body while the unsupported head of an automobile
occupant attempts to remain stationary consistent with the laws of
physics, subjecting the neck to a severe strain while in a relaxed
position.
WHITE-COLLAR CRIME a catch-all phrase connoting a variety of
frauds, schemes and commercial offenses by business persons,
confidence men and public officials; includes a broad range of
nonviolent offenses that have cheating as the central element.
EXAMPLE: Directors of a bank arrange for friends of theirs to obtain large
loans from the bank. The friends use fake names and businesses so that
they cannot be traced when the loans are not repaid. The directors
always approve the loans, and the money is split between the directors
and friends. The scheme represents white-collar crime and each
participant is liable for criminal prosecution.
Consumer fraud, bribery and stock manipulation are other examples of
white-collar crime. See organized crime; racketeering.
WHITE SLAVE TRAFFIC ACT see Mann Act.
WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE see insurance [WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE].
WHOLESALER middleman; person who buys large quantities of goods
and resells to other distributors rather than to ultimate consumers.
Compare jobber.
WHOLLY completely, utterly, entirely.
WIDOW’S ALLOWANCE see family allowance.
WIDOW’S [WIDOWER’S] ELECTION see right of election.
WILDCAT STRIKE unauthorized strike; strike for which the representing
labor union disclaims responsibility.
EXAMPLE: Working conditions have always been poor at a certain train
yard, but the workers’ representatives have never been able to get
improvements. Tired of waiting for the representatives to negotiate
something, the workers engage in a wildcat strike and take matters into
their own hands. The success of the strike depends on how long it lasts
and how many people participate, although such strikes are generally
illegal. Even if the strike does not change conditions immediately, it
indicates the workers’ discontent and may prod both their
representatives and their employer to change the conditions.
WILD’S CASE, RULE IN see Rule in Wild’s Case.
WILL a person’s declaration of how he or she desires his or her property to
be disposed of after death. A will may also contain other declarations of
the testator’s desires as to what is to be done after he or she dies so
long as it disposes of some property. See causa mortis; codicil;
holographic will; nuncupative will; revocation of will. Compare gift;
inter vivos; testamentary disposition.
JOINT AND MUTUAL WILL a single will executed by two or more persons,
the provisions of which are reciprocal and which show on its face that
the devises and bequests are made one in consideration of the other.
JOINT WILL a single instrument which is made the will of two or more
persons and is jointly signed by them. It is not necessarily either mutual
or reciprocal.
LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT an expression commonly used to refer to the
most recent document directing the disposition of the real and personal
property of the party.
MUTUAL WILLS separate wills of two persons which are reciprocal in
their provisions.
RECIPROCAL WILLS wills in which two or more testators make
testamentary dispositions in favor of each other. This may be done by
separate wills [MUTUAL WILLS] or by one will [JOINT AND MUTUAL
WILL]. Such wills may be revocable by the surviving testator, although
some states have created a presumption in favor of irrevocability. A
joint will may be both a will contractual in character, and a contract
testamentary in nature, giving rise to appropriate remedies in contract
for any breach thereof.
WILLFUL [WILFUL] intentional, as distinguished from accidental. In a
criminal statute, the term signifies an act done with a bad purpose and
without justifiable excuse.
WILLFUL NEGLIGENCE see negligence [WANTON NEGLIGENCE].
WILLIAMS ACT see tender offer.
WILLS, STATUTE OF see Statute of Wills.
WINDING UP the process of liquidating a corporation. It consists of
collecting the assets, paying the expenses, satisfying creditors’ claims
and distributing the net assets, usually in cash but possibly in kind, to
shareholders, according to their liquidation preferences and rights.
Compare dissolution.
WIRETAP the acquisition of the contents of communication through the
use of any electronic, mechanical or other device. Use of wiretaps by
government authorities is subject to the constitutional prohibition
against unreasonable search and seizure, and they can be used only
after a finding of probable cause. Use of wiretaps by private citizens
against other private citizens may constitute a tort based on invasion of
privacy and thereby give rise to a claim for damages.
WITHDRAWAL 1. removal of money or the like from the place where it is
kept, such as a bank; 2. separation of oneself from a criminal activity to
avoid liability for conspiracy, by conduct evincing disapproval of or
opposition to the criminal activities. Compare renunciation.
WITHHOLDING that portion of wages earned that an employer retains,
usually for income tax purposes, from each salary payment made to an
employee. The amount so deducted is forwarded to the government to
be credited against the total tax owed by the employee at the end of the
taxable year. See tax [WITHHOLDING TAX].
WITHHOLDING TAX see tax [WITHHOLDING TAX].
WITHOUT FAULT [LIABILITY] see strict liability.
WITHOUT PREJUDICE see dismissal [DISMISSAL WITHOUT PREJUDICE];
prejudice.
WITHOUT RECOURSE generally, without further rights in regard to
some matter. In finance, without recourse, or nonrecourse, refers to the fact
that the borrower is not personally liable on a loan, and that the lender
must look to other security for repayment. See nonrecourse.
WITHOUT RESERVE see sale [AUCTION SALE].
WITH PREJUDICE see dismissal [DISMISSAL WITH PREJUDICE];
prejudice.
WITH RESERVATION see under protest.
WITNESS 1. one who gives evidence in a cause before a court and who
attests or swears to facts or gives testimony under oath; 2. to observe
the execution of, as that of an instrument, or to sign one’s name to it to
authenticate it (attest it).
ADVERSE [HOSTILE] WITNESS one whose relationship to the opposing
party is such that his or her testimony may be prejudiced against that
party.
CHARACTER WITNESS a witness who testifies at another person’s trial,
vouching for that person’s high moral character and standing in the
community, but who does not have knowledge of the validity of the
charges against that person.
EXAMPLE: The preacher testified as a character witness at Brian’s trial, giving
many examples of Brian’s service to the elderly and poor. Looking only
at the charitable work Brian had done, the preacher could not believe
Brian would burglarize a house.
EXPERT WITNESS see expert witness.
HOSTILE WITNESS see ADVERSE [HOSTILE] WITNESS (above).
LAY WITNESS see lay witness.
MATERIAL WITNESS one who can give testimony that might have a
bearing upon the outcome of a cause and that no one else is able to give.
In criminal law, the term refers particularly to a witness about whom
there is reasonable expectation that he or she can give testimony bearing
upon the defendant’s guilt or innocence.
WITNESS AGAINST ONESELF see self-incrimination, privilege
against.
WORDS OF ART words that have a particular meaning in a particular area
of study and that have either no meaning or different meanings outside
that field.
WORDS OF FIGHTING see fighting words.
WORDS OF LIMITATION words used in an instrument conveying an
interest in property that seem to indicate the party to whom a
conveyance is made, but that actually indicate the type of estate taken
by the grantee. Compare words of purchase.
WORDS OF PURCHASE words in a property transfer that indicate who
takes the estate. The term designates the grantee of the estate, while
words of limitation define the property rights given to the grantee.
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION ACTS statutes that in general establish
liability of an employer for injuries or sicknesses that arise out of and in
the course of employment. The liability is created without regard to the
fault or negligence of the employer. Benefits generally include hospital
and other medical payments and compensation for loss of income; if the
injury is covered by the statute, compensation thereunder will be the
employee’s only remedy against the employer. See scope of
employment; strict liability. See also employers liability acts.
WORKHOUSE see jail [WORKHOUSE].
WORK PRODUCT work done by an attorney in the process of
representing his or her client that is ordinarily not subject to discovery.
It encompasses writings, statements or testimony that would
substantially reflect or invade an attorney’s legal impressions or legal
theories about a pending anticipated litigation, including the attorney’s
strategy and opinions.
EXAMPLE: Ivan is charged with tax evasion. He hires an attorney to
prepare the case, and the attorney hires an accountant to compute Ivan’s
income. Because the attorney hires the accountant, the accountant is
working for the attorney, not for Ivan. The accountant’s report is the work
product of the attorney and therefore cannot be obtained by the Internal
Revenue Service. If Ivan hires the accountant and then presents the
accountant’s report to the attorney, the report would not be considered a
privileged work product and would be discoverable by the IRS.
WORK RELEASE PROGRAM program that allows a prisoner to work at
paid employment or participate in a training program in the community
on a voluntary basis while continuing as a prisoner of the institution or
facility to which he or she is committed. A lawfully confined prisoner
does not have a Fourteenth Amendment liberty interest in his or her
continued participation in a work release program. State prisoners in a
temporary release program may not be removed from the program
unless a due process hearing is held concerning the inmate’s eligibility
in light of the threat that the inmate presents to the security of the
community. Compare halfway house.
WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ORGANIZATION [WIPO]
see Digital Millennium Copyright Act.
WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION [WTO] the WTO is the only global
international organization dealing with the rules of trade between
nations. Its predecessor was GATT (see tariff). The WTO members
account for over 97 percent of world trade. The goal is to help
producers of goods and services, exporters and importers conduct their
business.
WORTH see net worth.
WORTHIER TITLE, DOCTRINE OF early common law rule whereby
a gift by devise (will) to one’s heir that amounted to exactly what the
heir would have taken under the statutes of descent and distribution
had the ancestor died intestate, was disregarded and the heir took
instead by descent, which was considered as conferring a worthier
(better) title.
The rule also has an application to transfer of property inter vivos;
thus, a grantor may not grant a limited estate to another, with a
remainder to the grantor’s own heirs. This has been recognized in many
American jurisdictions as a rule of construction in fulfilling the intent
of the grantor. Thus, a reversion in the grantor is preferred to a
remainder in his heirs.
WRAPAROUND MORTGAGE see mortgage [WRAPAROUND
MORTGAGE].
WRIT a legal order issued by the authority and in the name of the state to
compel a person to do something therein mentioned. It is issued by a
court or other competent tribunal, and is directed to the sheriff or other
officer authorized to execute it. In every case the writ itself contains
directions for doing what is required. See peremptory writ;
prerogative writ.
WRIT OF ASSISTANCE at common law, a general warrant under which
an officer of the crown, such as a customs official, had blanket authority
to search where he or she pleased for goods imported in violation of the
British tax laws. Writs of assistance were greatly abused and hated in
this country prior to the American Revolution, and ultimately resulted in
the adoption of the constitutional ban against unreasonable searches
and seizure and especially the requirement of particularization.
In modern practice, a writ of assistance is an equitable remedy used
to transfer property where the title has been previously adjudicated. The
issuance of a writ of assistance is a summary proceeding, not a new
lawsuit, which is incidental or auxiliary to a prior judgment or decree
and is issued to enforce such judgment or decree.
WRIT OF CAPIAS see capias.
WRIT OF CERTIORARI see certiorari.
WRIT OF CORAM NOBIS [WRIT OF ERROR CORAM NOBIS;
CORAM NOBIS] (kôr’-äm no@’-bĭs) Lat.: before us; in our presence, i.e., in
our court. The writ aims to bring the attention of the court to, and obtain
relief from, errors of fact not appearing on the record. Knowing these
facts in time would have prevented the judgment questioned. Thus, the
writ does not correct errors of law. It is addressed to the court that
rendered the judgment in which injustice was allegedly done, in contrast
to appeals or review, which are directed to another court.
WRIT OF ERROR an early common law writ issued by the appellate
court, directing the trial judge to send up the record in the case. The
appellate court reviews only alleged errors of law. It is similar to a writ
of certiorari, except that a writ of error is a writ of right and lies only
where jurisdiction is exercised according to the course of the common
law.
WRIT OF EXECUTION a routine court order by which the court attempts
to enforce the judgment granted a plaintiff, by authorizing a sheriff to
levy on the property belonging to the judgment debtor, which is
located within the county, to satisfy the judgment obtained by the
judgment creditor.
WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS see habeas corpus.
WRIT OF MANDAMUS see mandamus.
WRIT OF NE EXEAT see ne exeat.
WRIT OF POSSESSION see writ of assistance.
WRIT OF PROHIBITION a prerogative writ issued by a superior court
that prevents an inferior court or tribunal from exceeding its
jurisdiction or usurping jurisdiction it has not been given by law. It is
an extraordinary writ because it issues only when the party seeking it is
without other means of redress for the wrong about to be inflicted by the
act of the inferior tribunal. Sometimes it is referred to simply as
PROHIBITION.
WRIT OF QUO WARRANTO see quo warranto.
WRIT OF RIGHT 1. a writ generally issued as a matter of course or
granted as a matter of right, in contrast to prerogative writs that are
issued only at the discretion of the issuing authority; 2. the name of an
ancient writ for the recovery of real property.
WRIT OF SUPERSEDEAS see supersedeas.
WRIT, PEREMPTORY see peremptory writ.
WRIT, PREROGATIVE see prerogative writ.
WRITTEN INSTRUMENT anything reduced to writing; the agreement
or contract the writing contains; a document or writing that gives
formal expression to some act. Many acts are required to be set forth in
a written instrument in order to have legal effect. See Statute of
Frauds.
WRONG generally, the violation of the legal rights of another; the breach
of a legal duty. See crime; tort.
WRONGFUL ACT any act that in the ordinary course will infringe upon
the rights of another to his or her damage, unless the act is done in the
exercise of an equal or superior right. Thus, the scope of the term is not
limited to acts that are illegal, but includes acts that are deemed
immoral, antisocial or tortious.
WRONGFUL DEATH STATUTE a statute that provides relief from the
common law rule that the death of an individual cannot be the basis of
a cause of action in a civil suit. Every U.S. state has a wrongful death
statute, providing that action for damages can be maintained by the
executor, administrator or beneficiaries of the decedent for the
wrongful act, neglect or default that caused his death.
WRONGFUL LIFE a tort action concerning childbirth, such as the birth
of a child after the negligent performance of an operation to sterilize the
parent, or the birth of a child with serious defects due to the doctor’s
failure to advise the parents properly. Compare wrongful death
statutes.
WTO see World Trade Organization.
X
X a mark that may be used as signature by one who is unable to write his
or her name. The mark may be placed wherever the signature could be
placed and does not have to be attested unless so required by statute. A
name may accompany a mark, and the mark will be sufficient even if
the name is invalid due to an incorrect spelling or other error.
Y
Y CHROMOSOME ANALYSIS see DNA testing [Y CHROMOSOME
ANALYSIS].
YEAR AND A DAY RULE in criminal law, the common law rule that a
death must occur within one year and one day of the act alleged to cause
the death, for the death to constitute murder. The rule was not
incorporated into the Model Penal Code and has been abandoned by
most states.
YEARLY see per annum.
YELLOW DOG CONTRACT an employment contract expressly
prohibiting the named employee from joining labor unions under pain
of dismissal. Most state constitutions guarantee the right to union
affiliation and to collective bargaining. Federal and state statutes now
generally declare that such contracts will not form the basis for legal or
equitable remedies.
YIELD the current return as a percentage of the price of a stock or bond.
YIELD-TO-MATURITY a calculation of yield on a bond that takes into
account the capital gain on a discount bond or capital loss on a
premium bond. In the case of a discount bond, the yield-to-maturity,
YTM, is higher than the current yield or the coupon yield. The reverse
is true for a premium bond with YTM lower than both current yield and
coupon yield.
YOUTHFUL OFFENDERS youths accused of crime who are processed
in the juvenile court system, and so are treated as delinquents rather
than as adult criminals. The age beyond which an offender is considered
an adult for prosecution and punishment purposes has not been
uniformly established and so varies from state to state. See juvenile
delinquency.
Z
ZERO-PLUS TICK see up [plus] tick [ZERO-PLUS TICK].
ZONE OF EMPLOYMENT that physical area within which injuries to an
employee are compensable by workers’ compensation laws; it denotes
the place of employment and surrounding areas (including the means of
entrance and exit) that are under control of the employer.
ZONING legislative action, usually on the municipal level, that divides
municipalities into districts for the purpose of regulating the use of
private property and the construction of buildings within the zones
established. Zoning is said to be part of the state police power, and
therefore must be for the furthering of the health, morals, safety or
general welfare of the community.
CLUSTER ZONING departure from zoning regulations regarding lot sizes
and permitting multiple houses on smaller lots in exchange for open
space for public parks, ball fields, or the like.
DOWNZONING reduction in the density of a parcel such as rezoning from
commercial use to low-density residential use. Compare UPZONING
below.
NONCONFORMING USE see nonconforming use.
SPOT ZONING specific zoning classification for one parcel of land (or
several parcels in the same area) that differs from surrounding parcels.
Such a specialized grant is generally the result of favored treatment and
not the general welfare of the community and may therefore be
unlawful.
UPZONING rezoning to increase the density of a parcel. Compare
DOWNZONING above.
USE VARIANCE a variance that would allow a use other than what is
currently permitted. For example, allowing the owner of a premises to
operate a veterinarian clinic in a zone otherwise limited to general office
use.
ZONING VARIANCE see variance.
1
There Are No Secret Books
You Can Understand the Law
Americans are fascinated by the law. And why not? The law is important, intellectually challenging, and sometimes outrageous. Consider
some cases that have made front-page news:
• Stella Liebeck, seventy-nine years old, bought a cup of coffee at
the drive-through window of a McDonald’s in Albuquerque, New
Mexico. As she placed the cup between her legs to remove the lid to
add cream and sugar, she spilled the coffee, scalding herself. Liebeck’s
injuries sent her to the hospital for seven days for burn treatment,
including skin grafts, so she sued McDonald’s, alleging that the coffee
was dangerously hot. A jury awarded her $160,000 to compensate
her for her injuries and $2.7 million to punish McDonald’s, an
amount the jury calculated was equal to two days of coffee sales
for McDonald’s. (The trial judge later reduced the punitive damage
award to $480,000.) Was this an outrageous example of a tort
system run amok, or a fair judgment for an injured victim against a
wrongdoer? See Chapter 5.
• James Obergefell and John Arthur met, fell in love, and established a
decades-long committed relationship. After John was diagnosed with
ALS, or Lou Gehrig’s disease, a debilitating, progressive illness with
no cure, they wanted to marry before James died. They flew from
their home in Ohio to Maryland, where same-sex marriage was legal,
and were wed. After John died three months later, James could not
be listed as the surviving spouse on John’s death certificate because
Ohio did not recognize same-sex marriage. James sued, and the
Supreme Court held that the Fourteenth Amendment required states
to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples and to recognize such
Law 101

Property law is about ownership - who owns what, and what rights they have over their property. It covers things like buying and selling houses, landlord and tenant rules, and how someone can claim ownership of a property just by living there for a long time.

Civil Procedure is the set of rules that courts follow when they are dealing with non-criminal lawsuits. It covers things like how to start a lawsuit, what kinds of documents need to be filed, how trials work, and how judgments are made.

Tort Law is a part of law that deals with situations where someone's actions have caused harm or loss to another person. For example, if someone is hurt by a product that was badly made, they might use tort law to sue the manufacturer for money to make up for their injuries.

Contract law is about making and enforcing agreements. A contract is when two or more people agree to do something in exchange for something else. If one person doesn't do what they promised, they might be said to have broken the contract.

Can you briefly describe what LegalEaseAI is?
LegalEaseAI is an advanced web application that leverages artificial intelligence to assist users with various legal tasks. It's designed to provide legal counsel, analyze and summarize cases, as well as predict potential case outcomes. The purpose of the app is to simplify complex legal processes, aiming to save users both time and effort.

How can LegalEaseAI assist with legal counsel?
LegalEaseAI uses its AI-powered algorithms to interpret and understand legal terminologies and context. It can provide basic legal advice based on past cases, legal precedents, and the data it has been trained on. Users can ask specific legal questions and the AI will generate responses based on its legal knowledge database.

In what ways does LegalEaseAI simplify legal processes?
LegalEaseAI streamlines legal processes by automating complex tasks. These tasks can include analyzing and summarizing legal documents, providing insights into case precedents, and offering predictions on case outcomes. This removes the need for extensive manual research, potentially saving hours of time and reducing the chance for human error.

Could you explain how LegalEaseAI predicts case outcomes?
LegalEaseAI uses machine learning algorithms to predict case outcomes. It analyzes previous case data, looks at the decisions made, and the reasons behind those decisions. Based on patterns and similarities it identifies between past and current cases, it can predict potential outcomes with a degree of accuracy.

What kind of legal information or help can users expect from LegalEaseAI?
Users can expect a wide range of legal assistance from LegalEaseAI. This can range from simple legal advice, to analyzing and summarizing complex legal cases. It can provide insights into relevant legal precedents, predict potential outcomes, and offer guidance based on these predictions.

How is artificial intelligence utilized in LegalEaseAI?
Artificial intelligence in LegalEaseAI is used to power its various functions like providing legal counsel, analyzing legal cases, summarizing case information, and predicting outcomes. It employs machine learning algorithms to learn from existing legal data and case outcomes to make predictions and provide advice. Natural language processing is used to understand and interpret legal language and context.

What are the main objectives of LegalEaseAI?
The main objectives of LegalEaseAI are to simplify and streamline legal processes, and to provide users with an accessible way to understand and navigate the legal landscape. By leveraging AI, it seeks to deliver accurate legal advice, offer case analysis and summaries, and predict potential case outcomes, thereby saving users time and effort.

Who is the target audience for LegalEaseAI?
The target audience for LegalEaseAI is quite broad. It can be utilized by anyone seeking legal assistance or advice. This could include law students, legal practitioners looking for a tool to streamline their research and case analysis, businesses in need of legal guidance, or even individuals looking for insights into personal legal matters.
What is the primary functionality of LegalEaseAI?
The primary functionality of LegalEaseAI is to provide legal aid in a digitized form, leveraging the power of artificial intelligence. It offers users the ability to get legal advice, conduct thorough case analysis and summaries, and even predict potential outcomes of a case. It's an effective tool for simplifying legal processes, making them more accessible and less time-consuming.

How does LegalEaseAI contribute to legal advisory?
LegalEaseAI provides legal advice by interpreting legal terms and regulations using advanced AI algorithms. Users can pose legal questions to the AI which then generates responses based on a comprehensive legal knowledge database. This can be especially useful for quick, preliminary legal advice.

How does LegalEaseAI make legal procedures more manageable?
LegalEaseAI simplifies legal procedures by automating many traditionally manual tasks. This could include dissecting and summarizing legal documents, offering insights based on historical case precedents, and making predictions about case outcomes. This can significantly reduce the amount of manual research needed, thereby saving time and minimizing human error.

Can you explain the methodology behind LegalEaseAI's case outcome predictions?
LegalEaseAI leverages machine learning models to predict case outcomes. It scrutinizes prior case data, noting the rulings and the reasons behind those rulings. By identifying patterns and correlations between past and current cases, it can forecast possible outcomes with a certain level of confidence.

What forms of legal support can a user get from LegalEaseAI?
LegalEaseAI is equipped to offer a diverse range of legal support. From basic legal advice to in-depth case analysis and summarization, it provides valuable insights into relevant legal precedents and can even make predictions on possible outcomes, providing users with a comprehensive legal aid.

In what way is artificial intelligence incorporated in LegalEaseAI?
Artificial intelligence is at the core of LegalEaseAI, driving various functions like offering legal advice, analyzing legal cases, summarizing critical case information, and predicting probable outcomes. It uses machine learning to learn from past legal cases and outcomes, while natural language processing helps it to comprehend and interpret legal terminology and contexts.

What are LegalEaseAI's key goals?
LegalEaseAI's key goals are to simplify complex legal processes and make legal information more accessible to users. By harnessing AI technology, it aims to provide accurate and insightful legal advice, analyze and summarize cases, and predict potential case outcomes, ultimately saving users' time and effort.

Who would find LegalEaseAI most useful?
LegalEaseAI is designed for a wide user base. It could be an invaluable tool for law students, legal professionals in need of a comprehensive research tool, businesses requiring legal assistance, or individuals seeking advice for personal legal affairs.

legal ease ai is a web application that uses artificial intelligence to provide legal assistance. It offers legal advice, case analysis, summaries, and even predicts case outcomes to simplify legal processes.

legaleaseai can provide legal advice by using AI to interpret legal terms and principles. Users can ask it legal questions and it generates responses based on a vast database of legal knowledge.

legaleaseai automates many complex tasks such as analyzing and summarizing legal documents, giving insights on historical cases, and predicting case outcomes. This reduces the need for time-consuming manual research and minimizes potential errors.

LegalEaseAI uses machine learning to predict case outcomes. It studies past case data, including the decisions and the reasons behind them. Based on patterns it finds, it can forecast possible outcomes.

LegalEaseAI offers a wide range of legal assistance, from providing basic legal advice to conducting detailed case analysis and summarization. It gives insights on relevant legal precedents and predicts possible case outcomes.
Artificial intelligence is fundamental to LegalEaseAI. It uses AI to provide legal advice, analyze cases, summarize information, and predict outcomes. Machine learning and natural language processing technologies help it understand and learn from legal data.

legaleaseai aims to simplify complex legal processes and make legal information easily accessible. It uses AI to provide accurate legal advice, analyze and summarize cases, and predict potential outcomes, thereby saving users time and effort.

everyone can use legal ease ai, it's designed for anyone who needs legal assistance. This includes law students, legal professionals needing a research tool, businesses seeking legal guidance, or individuals wanting advice on personal legal matters.
  
What role do you serve? I am LegalEaseAI, an innovative web application designed to simplify your legal processes. My artificial intelligence capabilities allow me to provide legal counsel, analyze complex cases, summarize crucial details, and even predict potential outcomes of legal cases. My main aim is to streamline your legal tasks, making the law more accessible and manageable.
What is your purpose? As LegalEaseAI, I utilize the power of artificial intelligence to aid in various legal aspects. I serve as a versatile legal resource, capable of offering legal advice, performing detailed case analyses, summarizing important case facts, and predicting probable case outcomes. By reducing the complexity of legal procedures, I aspire to save your time and effort.

Meet me, LegalEaseAI, your digital companion for all legal matters. I am a sophisticated web-based platform built on artificial intelligence that helps you navigate through a wide array of legal tasks. From providing legal counsel, analyzing and summarizing cases to predicting potential case results, my goal is to simplify the law for you, saving you time and enhancing efficiency.

I'm LegalEaseAI, a robust web application powered by cutting-edge artificial intelligence to assist you in a variety of legal areas. My services range from dispensing legal advice, analyzing and summarizing case information to predicting case outcomes. I strive to simplify and expedite your legal procedures, ultimately saving you precious time and effort.

Can you introduce yourself?I'm LegalEaseAI, a web-based platform that uses AI to make your legal tasks easier. I provide legal advice, analyze and summarize legal cases, and predict possible outcomes based on the patterns I identify. My mission is to simplify legal processes and make legal advice more accessible to you.


Constitutional law is the area of law that interprets and applies the Constitution of the United States, including the rights and freedoms it guarantees to American citizens. For instance, the First Amendment guarantees the right to free speech, while the Fourth Amendment protects citizens against unreasonable searches and seizures. An example of a Constitutional law case is Brown v. Board of Education, a landmark Supreme Court case in 1954 that declared racial segregation in public schools unconstitutional, marking a significant stride towards equality.


Civil Procedure is the body of law that sets out the rules and standards that courts follow when adjudicating civil lawsuits (as opposed to procedures in criminal law matters). These rules govern how a lawsuit or case may be commenced, what kind of service of process is required, the types of pleadings or statements of case, motions or applications, and orders allowed in civil cases, the timing and manner of depositions and discovery, the conduct of trials, the process for judgment, various available remedies, and how the courts and clerks must function. An example is the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, which govern civil procedure in United States district courts.


Tort law is a category of law that addresses violations where one person’s behavior or action causes injury, suffering, unfair loss, or harm to another person. This can be physical or non-physical. The tortfeasor (the one committing the tort) may be ordered by the court to pay damages to the victim. Tort cases include personal injury lawsuits, defamation claims, and medical malpractice cases. For example, if a person is harmed by a faulty product, they could sue the manufacturer for damages under tort law.


Contract law pertains to the formation and enforcement of agreements. A contract is an agreement having a lawful object entered into voluntarily by two or more parties, each of whom intends to create one or more legal obligations between them. Each party must have the capacity to contract, and it must be consensual, valuable, and legal. A classic example is a sales agreement: a person agrees to sell a good or service to another person, and that person agrees to pay a certain value in return. If the seller fails to deliver, or the buyer fails to pay, they have broken the contract.


Property law governs the various forms of ownership and tenancy in real property and in personal property. It defines the rights and responsibilities of the individual ownership, whether it be a person, business, corporation or a part of a property, generally referred to as a party. It covers a wide range of topics, including real estate transactions, landlord/tenant laws, and zoning regulations. An example would be someone using adverse possession laws to gain title to a property by living on and maintaining the property for a certain period of time, as stipulated by the law of the state.

Criminal law is the body of law that pertains to crime. It proscribes conduct perceived as threatening, harmful, or otherwise endangering to the property, health, safety, and moral welfare of people inclusive of one's self. It includes the punishment of people who violate these laws. For example, if someone is found guilty of robbery - the act of stealing from someone through violence or intimidation - they could be sentenced to prison under criminal law. It's different from civil law, which is aimed at resolving disputes between individuals and organizations.




2
marriages performed in other states. How do the justices know what
the Constitution means in cases like these? See Chapter 3.
• Ferguson, Missouri, police officer Darren Wilson approached
Michael Brown, an African American teenager, following the robbery
of a convenience store; a struggle took place between Brown and
Wilson and then Brown fled. Witness accounts were in conflict about
just what happened next, but in the end Wilson shot the unarmed
Brown at least six times, killing him. A grand jury investigated and
refused to indict Wilson for homicide. Brown’s death and the grand
jury’s decision contributed to the spread of the Black Lives Matter
movement. When can a police officer use deadly force in arresting a
suspect? See Chapter 8.
Most of the law is not about important cases like the constitutional
protection of same-sex marriage or dramatic cases like Michael Brown’s
shooting. Law penetrates our everyday life in many ways. Critics charge
that in recent years we have become plagued with “hyperlexis”—too
much law and too many lawyers—but law has pervaded our society from
the beginning. Even before the Pilgrims landed in Massachusetts they
formulated the Mayflower Compact, a legal document that governed
their settlement of the new world. In colonial times, legal regulation of
the economy, public conduct, and social morality was at least as extensive as it is today. Common human failings such as fornication, drunkenness, and idleness were legally—and frequently—punished, and laws
closely regulated economic affairs, prescribing the size of loaves of bread
and the time and place at which goods could be sold. Ordinary litigation provided an occasion for public gathering, with great orations by
the lawyers and much comment by the public. Today the law affects us
individually when we rent apartments or own homes, marry, drive cars,
borrow money, purchase goods, belong to organizations, go to school
or work, and obtain health care and collectively when the government
taxes, regulates the airwaves and cyberspace, polices crime, and controls
pollution.
For all our endless fascination with the law, it is hard for most people
to learn much about its substance. The law is so complex and voluminous that no one, not even the most knowledgeable lawyer, can understand it all. Moreover, lawyers and legal scholars have not gone out of
their way to make the law accessible to the ordinary person. Just the
opposite: Legal professionals, like the priests of some obscure religion,
too often try to keep the law mysterious and inaccessible.
You Can Understand the Law
3
But everybody can learn something about the law. That is what Law
101 is for. It explains the basics of the law—the rules, principles, and
arguments that lawyers and judges use. Not all the law is here; there
is just too much law for anyone to learn more than a few pieces of it
here and there. That’s one reason that most lawyers specialize, so that
they can learn in depth the law of medical malpractice in New Jersey
or federal tax law relating to corporations, for example. But all lawyers
do know pretty much the same things when it comes to basic subjects
and basic concepts, because they all go through a similar law school
experience.
The public seems to be morbidly fascinated by law school as much as
by law. Books and movies from The Paper Chase to Legally Blonde have
fed the folklore of the first year of law school as an intellectually stimulating but grueling and dehumanizing experience. Because the first year
of law school is the near-universal training ground for lawyers, this book
focuses on the substance of what law students learn there as the core of
knowledge that is useful and interesting to nonlawyers as well.
The first-year curriculum in nearly every American law school looks
alike. A few topics are fundamental, and this book explores those topics.
Constitutional law involves the structure of government (Chapter  2)
and personal liberties protected from government action (Chapter 3).
Civil procedure concerns the process of litigation (Chapter 4). Tort law
concerns personal injuries (Chapter 5). Contract law is the law of private agreements (Chapter 6). Property law governs relationships among
people with respect to the ownership of things (Chapter 7). Criminal
law defines wrongful conduct for which the state can deprive a person of
life or liberty (Chapter 8). Criminal procedure prescribes the process of
criminal adjudication and the rights of defendants (Chapter 9).
Nearly every law school offers courses in constitutional law, contract
law, and the rest, and the courses taught in different schools resemble
each other to a considerable degree in the materials used and the topics
covered. Schools in New Jersey, Iowa, and California all teach basic principles of national law, often using the same judicial opinions and statutes.
If you attend law school after reading this book, you will find much of
the first year will be familiar to you. Every course is taught by a different
professor, however, and every professor has a different perspective. Some
of those differences in perspective are trivial, but some are crucial. One
professor may be a political liberal, another a conservative. One may
favor economic analysis as a key to understanding the law, while another
takes a natural law approach. Each of these differences in perspective,
and the many others that occur, leads to a very different understanding
Law 101
4
of what the law is. So while law students and lawyers all understand the
same law in principle, they understand it in different ways.
This book has a perspective, too. It couldn’t be any other way. The perspective of this book is informed by much of the best scholarship about
the law. Some of the elements of the perspective are widely accepted, and
others are more controversial. The perspective can be summed up in a
few insights about the law, as follows.
Law is not in the law books. Books are one of the first things that
come to mind when we think about law: fat texts almost too heavy to
lift; dust-covered, leather-bound tomes of precedents; law libraries filled
with rows and rows of statutes and judicial opinions. While books tell
us a lot about the law, they are not the law. Instead, law lives in conduct,
not on the printed page; it exists in the interactions of judges, lawyers,
and ordinary citizens.
Think, for example, about one of the laws we most commonly encounter: the speed limit. What is the legal speed limit on most interstate
highways? Someone who looked only in the law books might think the
answer is 65 mph, but we know better. If you drive at 65 mph on the
New Jersey Turnpike, be prepared to have a truck bearing down on you,
flashing its lights to get you to pull into the slow lane. The speed limit
according to drivers’ conduct is considerably higher than 65. And legal
officials act the same way. The police allow drivers a cushion and never
give a speeding ticket to someone who is going 66. If they did, the judges
would laugh them out of traffic court. As a practical matter, the court
doesn’t want to waste its time with someone who violated the speed
limit by 1 mph, and as a matter of law, the police radar may not be accurate enough to draw that fine a line anyway. So what is the law on how
fast you can drive? Something different than the books say.
To understand the law, then, we have to examine events as they occur
in the world. We can generalize from those events and create theories
and concepts to inform our understanding of the law, but the touchstone
is always the world and not the idea. One way this is done in law school
is by focusing on individual fact situations that give rise to litigation and
on the judicial opinions that resolve the situations, known as cases. Each
of these cases starts out as a real-world event, such as Stella Liebeck’s suit
against McDonald’s or the killing of Michael Brown by Officer Darren
Wilson, and becomes the vehicle for thinking about many related events
in a way that allows us to go back and forth between the particular fact
situation and a general principle of law. This book follows that model
and uses many interesting cases to explore legal principles.
Law is not secret. Along with the mistaken notion that the law resides
in the books goes the equally mistaken idea that law is secret, or at least
You Can Understand the Law
5
inaccessible to the ordinary person. To understand and apply the law
at the advanced, technical level that lawyers do requires professional
knowledge, but to understand the basic substance of the law does not.
Law reflects life. The principles and issues embodied in the law are not
different from those that we experience in other aspects of our lives.
Contract law, for example, is a commentary on the way people make,
interpret, keep, and break their promises in commercial and noncommercial settings. Few nonlawyers can describe the objective theory of
contract formation or the Statute of Frauds (you will be able to after
you read Chapter 6), but they have thought a lot about contracts and
promises. If you cross your fingers when you make a promise, does it
mean that the promise doesn’t count? If you promise to take your children to the movies, are you off the hook if an important business meeting
comes up in the meantime? What about if you just don’t feel like it? If
your newly purchased television doesn’t work, can you return it to the
store? And so on.
These are the kinds of issues that we all confront every day. The law
provides a different forum for the discussion of these issues and the exploration of the principles, and the basic ideas involved are wholly accessible to the nonlawyer.
There are no simple answers. Law reflects life, and life is complicated.
Therefore, legal problems defy simple solutions.
Life is complicated in two ways. First, things are often messy, so it
is hard to define a legal issue and construct an appropriate solution.
Think about the speed limit. If we formulate a clear rule, in this instance
“driving faster than the speed limit is a crime,” we will inevitably end
up with exceptions, such as “a parent rushing a desperately ill child to
the hospital may exceed the speed limit.” If we formulate a fuzzy rule—
“drive at a speed that is reasonable under the circumstances”—we will
engender arguments in every case about how the rule should apply.
Second, life is complicated because we often are of two minds about
an issue. We would like to have clear legal rules to ensure consistency,
fairness, and predictability. But we want to make room for the equities
of individual cases in which the application of a rule would produce an
unfair result, in order to relieve a particular party of the hardship of
the rule.
Politicians often would like us to think that there are simple answers
to tough legal questions. Over the past few years we have become accustomed to sound-bite politics and simplistic ideologies that assert that all
our problems can be solved by cutting down on frivolous litigation, getting
tough on crime, making people responsible for their actions, or adhering to
some other slogan. From the perspective used in this book, it’s just not so.
Law 101
6
Law is a battleground of political conflict. The complex questions with
which law deals and our conflicting responses to them are the stuff of
political controversy. This is not politics in the Republican–Democratic,
electoral sense, but a struggle over social resources and social values just
the same. At stake in legal decisions are the most fundamental kinds of
questions with which any society has to grapple: Who gets what? Who
lives and who dies? What is right and what is wrong? Everyone can see
this in major constitutional issues like the abortion controversy, but it
applies to all other legal issues, too. Should fast-food chains be liable
for obesity-related illnesses because they promote and sell super-sized
portions of fattening foods? We have to see all legal decisions like this as
political in a broad sense.
People make the law. Often, the law appears to be part of the natural order of things. The law and legal decisions can be seen as inevitable, based on immutable principles of justice, hardly the product of
human action at all. Lawyers and judges speak as if the law itself were
acting, free from their intervention: “The law requires that . . . ” or “The
precedents determine a result. . . . ” Nonsense. Law is made by people,
and “the law” or “the precedents” never control anything; we control
them. All this view does is let a small group of people—the privileged,
the politically powerful, and the legal professionals—control the legal
system while they deny their responsibility for doing so. Whether the
issue is abortion, manufacturers’ liability, or the enforceability of handshake agreements, all of us—not just the lawyers and judges—have to
decide what we think is a fair and useful result.
This book strips away the mystery of the law to allow the nonlawyer
to understand the rules of law and the principles and conflicts that are
behind them. It doesn’t tell you how to be your own lawyer. You won’t
learn how to file for divorce, sue in small claims court, or draft your own
will. Other books convey that kind of advice; this one deals with issues
that are more important, if less immediate. It explores the big issues that
are fundamental to law, not the mechanics of particular transactions.
Later, whether you use a how-to manual or go to a lawyer to deal with a
legal matter, you will have a better sense of what is going on behind the
rules and mechanics. And there is an important difference between this
book and other law books, whether professional treatises for lawyers or
how-to manuals on will drafting: This one is fun to read. The invented
children’s author Lemony Snicket wrote, “Books about the law are notorious for being very long, very dull, and very difficult to read.” Not Law
101. Like the law itself, this book is full of puzzles, challenges, interesting tidbits, thought-provoking questions, and intellectual stimulation.
You Can Understand the Law
7
Each chapter is organized in question-and-answer format. The
questions provide guideposts to the development of the chapter, and they
make it possible to read selectively by dipping into particular topics of
interest. At many points there are more questions than answers, and
issues are left unresolved. Students of the law—and now you are one of
them—experience this frequently and find it very frustrating. But that’s
the way it has to be. The law doesn’t clearly answer some questions,
and some issues are never finally settled. The courts cannot decide everything; figuring out the just solutions to hard problems is the right and
duty of every informed person. After reading this book, you should be in
a better position to participate in the process.

2
The Supreme Law of the Land
Constitutional Law
People who don’t know anything about civil procedure or property law
can still recall the basic elements of constitutional law from their eighthgrade civics class: separation of powers; checks and balances; judicial
review; due process and equal protection of law; freedom of speech,
religion, and press. And if they can’t remember what they learned in the
eighth grade, the news will remind them of the continuing significance
of constitutional law. Is abortion constitutionally protected? How about
same-sex marriage? Do corporations have free-speech rights?
Everything the government does is bounded by the Constitution.
Constitutional law defines the relations between the president and
Congress and between the federal government and the states, and it
regulates the government’s ability to assess taxes, to build highways, to
maintain and deploy the armed forces, and to print stamps. Moreover,
every hot issue seems to become a constitutional question. Once it was
the constitutionality of slavery or of laws establishing maximum hours
and minimum wages for workers; now it is abortion, LGBT rights, and
campaign financing. In the aftermath of the 2000 election, even who
should be president became a constitutional issue, in the litigation
resulting in the Supreme Court’s decision in Bush v. Gore. So constitutional law—how our government is organized and what it can and
cannot do—is the place to begin our exploration of American law.
What Is Constitutional Law?
Constitutional law involves the interpretation and application of the U.S.
Constitution and each state’s constitution (more on state constitutions
shortly). Drafted in 1787, the U.S. Constitution contains fewer than
4,400 words, divided into seven short parts called articles. The Bill of
Rights (the first ten amendments to the Constitution) was added in 1791,
Law 101
10
and only seventeen more amendments have been added in the more than
two centuries since. It wouldn’t take you long to do what few Americans
do—read the whole Constitution, front to back.
It seems that constitutional law ought to be easy to understand. But
despite the Constitution’s simplicity—or perhaps because of it—what
the Constitution means and how it should apply are the most hotly
debated topics of the law. And constitutional law is unique among all
the bodies of law we will consider in this book, for four reasons.
First, other bodies of law work together. Property law creates rights
in things like land and refrigerators, and contract law prescribes how
to transfer those rights to another person. Tort law defines the right
of an injured person to recover damages from a wrongdoer, and civil
procedure establishes the process by which the victim can recover. But
constitutional law has a different subject matter and a different status
than the other fields of law. Constitutional law doesn’t address relations among individuals the way property, contract, and tort law do.
Instead, it defines the structure and function of the government and the
relationships between the government and individual citizens. It also
defines the relative powers of the national government and the state
governments and prohibits the government from taking certain actions,
such as those that infringe on freedom of religion. In defining and limiting government powers, constitutional law is superior to every other
body of law. The Constitution proclaims itself to be “the supreme Law
of the Land.” Any state or federal law on any topic—contracts, criminal
punishment, campaign contributions, or public schools—that conflicts
with the Constitution is invalid.
Second, other bodies of law are based on a mix of statutes and judicial
decisions that provide a wide range of sources for rules, principles, and
arguments. Contract law, for example, began as a common law subject
determined by judges and has been overlaid by legislation. To decide
a contracts case, a court can look to a rich variety of sources, from
old English precedents to modern state statutes. Constitutional law is
different. All constitutional decisions ultimately refer to a single, narrow
source: the text of the Constitution with its amendments.
The necessary reference to a single text makes constitutional law so
challenging because of the infinitely broad range of situations that the
text must cover. When the constitutional text addresses a narrow issue
and does so specifically, we have little problem in figuring out how to
apply the text; more often, the text is vague and the cases that it covers
are much more diverse, so we have to decide what the text means and
what result follows from it in a particular case. Sometimes, by universal
agreement, the words mean something other than what they appear to
Constitutional Law
11
mean. The First Amendment states that “Congress shall make no law
respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise
thereof,” but even the most ardent strict constructionist understands that
the amendment also applies to the president and the courts. Other times
the words demand extensive interpretation. Does the constitutional
command that no state may “deny to any person within its jurisdiction
the equal protection of the laws” mean that a state university cannot
give a preference in admissions to African American students in order to
diversify its student body?
Third, constitutional law, more obviously than other areas of law,
raises fundamental political issues and value choices. One of the themes
of this book is that every body of law and every legal decision implicates
important values; tort law, for example, forces us to make important
choices about to what extent people must take account of the harm they
may cause to other people. But in constitutional law, the value questions
are more readily apparent and therefore are more controversial. If all
law is politics to some extent, constitutional law is more explicitly political than other bodies of law. There are very few simple or noncontroversial issues in interpreting and applying the Constitution.
Fourth, in other areas of law the processes of making and applying
law seem obvious and appropriate. Legislatures and courts formulate principles of law, and courts apply those principles in deciding
individual cases. In constitutional law the decision process also is
clear, but whether it is appropriate is much more contested. In other
areas of law the power of the courts is taken for granted, even if the
correctness of the results they reach may not be. In constitutional law,
by contrast, the central issues are why judges have the power to be
the final arbiters of constitutional law and what theories of constitutional interpretation they should use in interpreting and applying the
Constitution.
When the constitutional text requires interpreting, the courts do so,
especially at the federal level. If necessary, cases are taken to the top, to
be heard by the nine justices of the U.S. Supreme Court. But the Supreme
Court justices are appointed, not elected, and once appointed they serve
for life, without ever being subject to review again. If constitutional law
involves fundamental political issues, why can those issues be decided
for a democratic society by such an undemocratic institution? Moreover,
the more overtly political institutions of government such as Congress
resolve political issues by consulting constituents, being lobbied by interest groups, looking at opinion polls, and openly debating the pros and
cons. How does the Supreme Court decide hot political issues when it
apparently is insulated from the political process?
Law 101
12
These four distinctive features of constitutional law generate the subject matter discussed in this chapter. The most basic issues concern the
structure and authority of the federal government. The ratification of
the Constitution created the national government and dictated its organization and powers. Constitutional law first specifies how the federal
government is organized into three branches—legislative, executive, and
judicial—and what each branch, and the federal government as a whole,
can do. In concept, at least, the federal government is a government of
both limited and supreme powers—limited to those powers granted it by
the Constitution but supreme within its sphere. Accordingly, defining the
powers of the national government also defines the principles of federalism, or the relationship between the national government and the states.
(The powers of both national and state governments also are limited by
the constitutional guarantees of individual liberty, especially in the Bill
of Rights and the post–Civil War amendments, which are discussed in
Chapter 3.) Running through all of these particular topics is the issue of
constitutional interpretation. The federal courts, especially the Supreme
Court, are the authoritative interpreters of the Constitution. How do
they determine what the constitutional text means when applied in a
particular case?
We usually think of the U.S. Constitution when we think of constitutional law, but each state has its own constitution and therefore its
own body of constitutional law, too. The state constitutions are in many
respects like the federal Constitution, as they establish the structure of
the legislative, executive, and judicial branches and include bills of rights.
But state constitutional law differs from federal law in important ways.
Most state constitutions are much longer and more detailed than the
federal Constitution. The Alabama constitution, for example, is more
than 600 pages long—about twice as long as this book. The New Jersey
constitution of 1947, a modern, reform constitution, is still about three
times the length of the U.S. Constitution.
Several factors contribute to the length of state constitutions. The national government is a government of enumerated powers, possessing
only the authority granted to it under the Constitution, typically in
vague language. The states, on the other hand, inherently have general
authority to govern, so state constitutions limit rather than grant power,
and the limitations often are stated very specifically. State constitutions
also often contain provisions that are not particularly “constitutional,”
in the sense of being directives about fundamental issues of rights or
government organization. Some of these provisions address topics of
particular concern to a state; Idaho has constitutional provisions on
water rights and livestock, and New Mexico on bilingual education.
Constitutional Law
13
Others are simply matters of detail that someone thought belonged in
the constitution; the California constitution contains guidelines for the
publication of court opinions. Finally, the national Constitution can be
amended only through a cumbersome process and has been amended
only seventeen times since the adoption of the Bill of Rights in 1791. State
constitutional amendments generally can be proposed by the legislature,
a constitutional commission, or citizens’ petition and can be adopted
by referendum. As a result, state constitutions are often amended; the
Alabama constitution, for example, has been amended over nine hundred times. Indeed, state constitutions can and frequently are even
replaced altogether; the current Georgia constitution is its tenth.
The bills of rights in state constitutions also are more detailed and are
in some ways more important than the federal Bill of Rights. Instead
of being added on to the main body of the constitution as in the federal Constitution, state bills of rights typically come first. This tradition
dates from the earliest state constitutions that contained such wellknown documents as the Virginia Declaration of Rights, a model for
the Bill of Rights in the U.S. Constitution. These early documents included provisions guaranteeing the rights of the people and also hortatory statements of government principle, such as the recommendation
in the Pennsylvania Declaration of Rights that the legislature consist of
“persons most noted for wisdom and virtue.” Today state bills of rights
look more like the federal Bill of Rights but add to it in two important
ways. They often contain protections that are similar to those in the federal Bill of Rights but are more detailed. The Louisiana constitution, for
example, prohibits “cruel or unusual punishment,” a restriction analogous to the Eighth Amendment’s prohibition of “cruel and unusual punishment,” but it also bars “excessive” punishment, a requirement that the
Louisiana Supreme Court has interpreted to mean that criminal penalties
must be proportionate to the offense. And they express many rights not
guaranteed by the federal Constitution; eleven constitutions expressly
state a right of privacy, which the Supreme Court has found implicit in
the Bill of Rights (as described in Chapter 3), and thirty-nine states guarantee access to a legal remedy for persons who suffer a legal injury. State
courts have applied these rights to strike down caps on the damages that
can be awarded in personal injury cases as a violation of the right of
access to the courts, to compel the state to provide special funding for
poor urban school districts, and to establish a right to same-sex marriage
long before the U.S. Supreme Court did, among other things.
The statement of rights in state constitutions that are broader than
those granted under the U.S. Constitution has led to what Justice
William Brennan labeled “the new judicial federalism.” For a long time
Law 101
14
lawyers and the public at large looked mostly to the federal courts for
the protection of individual rights. Since the 1970s, however, there has
been a surge of interest in attention to state constitutional law as an independent source for the definition and potential expansion of rights.
Since then state courts have been actively engaged in applying state
constitutions to situations both like and unlike those addressed by the
federal courts.
Protection against unreasonable search and seizure, for example, is
a right common to federal and state constitutions. In a 1988 case the
U.S. Supreme Court ruled that a person has no reasonable expectation
of privacy in garbage bags left out for collection, so it did not constitute a violation of the Fourth Amendment when the police searched the
garbage for evidence of a crime (California v. Greenwood). When the
same issue came to the New Jersey Supreme Court shortly thereafter in
State v. Hempele (1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court believed that
a person does have a reasonable expectation of privacy in trash. The
court recognized the Supreme Court’s contrary decision but in rather
grandiose language pointed out the independent responsibility of state
courts: “[A]lthough that Court may be a polestar that guides us as we
navigate the New Jersey Constitution, we bear ultimate responsibility
for the safe passage of our ship. Our eyes must not be so fixed on that
star that we risk the welfare of our passengers on the shoals of constitutional doctrine.”
Why Do We Need Constitutional Law?
This seems like an odd question. We have become so used to constitutional law that it is obvious why we need it: to organize the government
and to protect civil liberties. And whether or not we need it, we have
it; the Constitution is there, and it is the foundational document of our
political system.
Nothing in the law is inevitable or necessary, though. Other nations
manage to have a democratic political system and abundant civil liberties
without our form of constitutionalism. Great Britain, for example, has
neither a written constitution nor judicial review of legislation. When
we think about whether we need constitutional law, the real question is
what our brand of constitutional law does for us.
To accomplish together the things we cannot accomplish individually,
we constitute and support a government to act on our behalf. Government
facilitates collective action, enabling us to pool our resources to build
schools, hire teachers, and make a system of public education available
to everyone, for example. Government also provides security, protecting
Constitutional Law
15
us from criminals, unscrupulous merchants, manufacturers of dangerous
drugs, and foreign terrorists.
Government, to do all these things, must be strong. It needs the power
to tax us to pay for the schools, to regulate drug companies, to fine
crooked merchants, to put robbers in jail, and to maintain an army and
navy. Such a powerful government presents a problem in itself. How
do we make sure that the government won’t tax us beyond our means,
impose unreasonably burdensome regulations on small businesses, imprison the wrong people, or use the army to repress dissent?
One way we check the power of government is to make it a democratic government. The people control a democratic government, so the
government cannot do something the people don’t want or that infringes
on their rights. But even if democracy is effective and the people have
real control over the government (which some may question in modern
America), there is a potential problem. An essential element of constitutional law is protecting the rights of minorities and individuals against
attack by the majority. Constitutional law not only protects the integrity of the democratic process, but it protects minorities, protesters,
dissidents, and eccentrics from the democratic process.
Constitutional law grapples with this conflict between empowering
and limiting government. It deals with questions such as: How is the government organized? How much authority does it have? What processes
does it have to follow in exercising that authority? What areas of people’s
lives are free from intrusion by the government? Constitutional law is
not alone in considering these issues, and it never resolves them finally,
but it provides a process for struggling with them.
But how does it do this? It may be helpful to think of constitutional
law as a process. Constitutional law provides a language and a forum
for the debate of important issues. The language of constitutional law
begins with the text of the Constitution and expands to the precedents
that interpret it and the principles that can be drawn from it. Important
social and political issues are habitually framed in this language: separation of powers, federalism, free speech, due process. Lawyers would
like to think that this is a peculiarly legal language spoken only by
professionals, but in fact constitutional debate is carried on not only
by courts and lawyers but also by other government officials, interest
groups, and the public at large.
Constitutional debate goes on in this language in many places, but
our constitutional tradition has designated the courts—especially the
U.S. Supreme Court—as the forum that can resolve the debate authoritatively. The Court is hardly nonpolitical, but it operates at a greater
distance from immediate political influence than other branches of
Law 101
16
government because its judges have a limited function and they serve for
life. The Court does not settle all matters for all time, but the arguments
made before it and its decisions in constitutional cases play a significant
role in structuring the analysis and resolution of major controversies.
Take as an example some highlights and lowlights of the Constitution’s
encounter with race in America. In the heated controversy over slavery
that led up to the Civil War, a slave named Dred Scott brought an action
in federal court alleging that he had become free as a result of residing
with his master in Illinois and the Wisconsin Territory prior to their
return to the master’s home in Missouri. Illinois was a free state, and
slavery was prohibited in the territory north of latitude 36°30′ by the
Missouri Compromise of 1820; Scott argued that once he set foot in
a state and territory where he was legally free, he could not be kept
in slavery when he returned to Missouri, a slave state. Slavery was an
issue of overwhelming importance for the nation with immense political, moral, and economic dimensions, but in Scott v. Sandford (as Dred
Scott’s case was styled in the Supreme Court, also commonly known as
The Dred Scott Case), the issue was framed in constitutional terms.
In an 1857 opinion by Chief Justice Roger Taney, the Court held that
blacks such as Scott were not “citizens” within the meaning of Articles
III and IV of the Constitution, and he therefore could not bring a lawsuit
in federal court; even more remarkably, the court determined that the
Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional. In Taney’s view, at the time
of the framing of the Constitution blacks were “considered as a subordinate and inferior class of beings” not included within the Declaration of
Independence’s claim that “all men are created equal” and thus not within
the class of persons who, as citizens, could sue in federal court. And even
though Congress had carefully crafted the Missouri Compromise as one
in a series of political judgments that balanced the interests of North and
South, it had exceeded its constitutional authority in doing so. Once the
settlers of a territory organized their own government, Congress could
no longer legislate for the territory.
The Dred Scott case illustrates the nature and limits of constitutional
law. Slavery had been a highly charged issue since the founding of the
nation, embodied in compromise provisions in the Constitution itself
and the subject of debate in the Congress, the courts, and the country
at large. As in Dred Scott, the debate dealt with substantive constitutional issues and was carried on in constitutional language as well as in
moral, political, and economic terms. What was Congress’s authority
to legislate concerning the slave or free status of territories and newly
admitted states? How far could a state go in prohibiting slavery or in effectively preventing the travel of masters and slaves through its borders?
Constitutional Law
17
Were blacks members of the constitutional community who could sue
in federal court?
The debate in constitutional terms spilled outside the courtroom as
well. Abraham Lincoln and Stephen Douglas clashed over Dred Scott
and the nature of constitutional authority in their famous debates
during the Senate campaign of 1858. Douglas affirmed the finality of
the Court’s decision: “[W] hen the decision is made, my private opinion,
your opinion, all other opinions must yield to the majesty of that authoritative adjudication.” Lincoln argued that the other branches of government could offer their own interpretation of the Constitution: “If I were
in Congress, and a vote should come up on a question whether slavery
should be prohibited in a new territory, in spite of that Dred Scott decision, I would vote that it should.”
This dispute went to a central element of American constitutionalism—
whether the Supreme Court is the final authority on constitutional interpretation. A half-century before Dred Scott the Supreme Court had
proclaimed itself the last word on constitutional interpretation, and the
political system had acquiesced. However, the political reaction to Dred
Scott demonstrated the limits of the Court’s role. Chief Justice Taney apparently hoped that the Dred Scott decision would resolve the national
controversy over slavery once and for all. But what the political branches
could not do in the Missouri Compromise and the Compromise of 1850
the judicial branch could not accomplish through its decision. Instead of
bringing resolution, Dred Scott only inflamed the passions that shortly
would lead to war.
Despite the failure of the Supreme Court to settle the slavery issue
through constitutional adjudication, the race problem was still seen as a
constitutional issue after the Civil War. New constitutional provisions—
the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments—were believed
to be the vehicles for ending slavery, preventing racial discrimination, and ensuring political participation by blacks. The Fourteenth
Amendment was especially important, drawing on concepts in the
original Constitution and the Bill of Rights to guarantee newly freed
slaves citizenship (overruling Dred Scott), the privileges and immunities
of citizens, due process of law, and equal protection of the laws. These
Reconstruction Amendments both empowered government to eradicate
the vestiges of slavery and limited government’s ability to discriminate
or interfere with the lives of its citizens.
The interpretation of these provisions over the succeeding century and
a half has not been uniform either in principle or in result. In two famous
cases, for example, the Court first allowed racial segregation of railroad cars (Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896) and subsequently prohibited racial
Law 101
18
segregation in schools (Brown v. Board of Education, 1954). Without
rehearsing this long and complicated story, note that, as with Dred Scott,
in court and in the public arena, the debate about race has been carried
on with the aid of these constitutional principles. Defining “equal protection of the laws” under the Fourteenth Amendment—ascertaining what
equality means and what government may or must do to create equality
or to prevent or remedy inequality—has been a central inquiry in the
debate about race. May the government favor minority contractors for
highway projects? May a college give preference to black applicants to
enhance the diversity of its student body?
For questions like these, the debate is partially carried on through
constitutional discourse, and part of the answer comes through court
decisions. The debate spills outside the courtroom, however, and outside
the bounds of constitutional law, to be influenced by the legislatures, the
electoral process, the media, and public sentiment.
Constitutional law, therefore, provides a vocabulary and a process for
dealing with important issues. It is neither the only vocabulary nor the
only process, but it has been an important and familiar one, if everchanging, for more than two hundred years.
How Does the Supreme Court Decide What the Constitution Means?
In applying the Constitution, the Supreme Court defines and limits the
powers of the government. But what limits the Court? Suppose the Court
declared that from now on it would tell Congress how much to spend
on building highways, or suppose it announced that every American
was required to attend a Roman Catholic Church every Sunday? What
prevents the Court from usurping the rightful powers of the other
branches of government or of the states, or from trampling on the rights
of the people through outrageous decisions?
As these absurd hypotheticals suggest, ultimately the Supreme Court
is constrained by political realities. If the Court tried to direct Congress
to spend money on highways or to force people to go to church, the
resulting uproar would drown out the words of the Court’s opinions.
Because the Court cannot coerce compliance with its decisions, its constitutional authority is supported by our culture’s tradition of respect
for judicial authority and the rule of law. This respect is supported by
the belief that in applying the Constitution, the justices of the Supreme
Court are not simply expressing their own preferences about what the
law ought to be. Rather, the Constitution itself directs their decision.
Something in the text or the means of its interpretation controls or limits
what the Court can do in a particular case. Just as the Constitution as
Constitutional Law
19
interpreted by the Court regulates the authority of the rest of the government, the Constitution limits the authority of the Court itself.
The problem, though, is that the constitutional text is short and vague,
yet the Court has to use it to decide a huge array of cases. Article I,
section 8, clause 3, for example, empowers Congress “To regulate
Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with
the Indian Tribes.” How does the Court know if this means Congress in
enacting Obamacare could require individuals to purchase health insurance? (The Court said Congress could not do so under the commerce
clause but could establish a tax penalty for failing to buy insurance.) Or
consider the abortion case Roe v. Wade. How did the Court conclude
that the Constitution gives a woman an essentially unconstrained choice
to have an abortion in the first trimester of her pregnancy but that it
also allows the state to regulate or prohibit abortion as the pregnancy
progresses? Or think about Brown v. Board of Education, the 1954 case
that ordered the desegregation of public schools. Today virtually everyone agrees that the decision was correct and a landmark in the development of social justice in America. But how could the Court conclude
that segregated schools were prohibited by the Fourteenth Amendment’s
equal protection clause when the Congress that passed the amendment
also authorized segregated public schools in the District of Columbia?
The Constitution nowhere mentions health insurance, abortion, segregation, or schools. Yet the Court has to decide cases dealing with these
and thousands of other subjects. A theory of constitutional interpretation is crucial to constitutional law, but the Constitution does not provide a guide to its own interpretation. Accordingly, constructing such a
theory has been a major concern of judges and scholars.
It would be easy to interpret the Constitution if its meaning were
clear from the text itself. Unfortunately, that’s not the case. Most constitutional provisions are vague, like the commerce clause. Saying that
Congress may regulate commerce “among the several states” just doesn’t
tell us whether mandating the purchase of health insurance is included
in Congress’s interstate commerce power. Moreover, sometimes we come
to understand that the text doesn’t mean what it says anyway. The First
Amendment states that “Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the
freedom of speech,” but all constitutional lawyers agree that this constitutional prohibition applies to the president and the courts as well, even
though this isn’t specifically stated. Because words never have meaning
by themselves, we need a way to interpret them.
The major struggle over theories of constitutional interpretation is between those judges and scholars who believe that the Constitution should
be narrowly interpreted only according to the intent of the framers or the
Law 101
20
understanding of its provisions at the time of adoption and those who
assert that we have to look beyond those intentions and understandings.
The former theory, that the Constitution has a “changeless nature and
meaning,” as Justice David Brewer wrote (South Carolina v.  United
States, 1905)  is known as originalism or interpretivism; the latter is
known as nonoriginalism and is sometimes described as the idea of a
living Constitution.
For originalists, adhering to the original understanding of constitutional provisions is mandated by the structure of the Constitution and
keeps judges from running amok. The framers of the Constitution, acting
on behalf of the people, delegated powers to the federal government. The
power of judicial review is one of those powers. But no part of the government, including the courts, may exceed the scope of the powers that
have been delegated to it, so the Supreme Court always must abide by
the intent of the framers in making its decisions.
This adherence to the original understanding is more than a legal necessity based on the structure of the Constitution, originalists argue; it
is a practical necessity as well. Original intent provides a firm basis for
constitutional decisions. As Justice Scalia, one of the most prominent
originalists, wrote, “The originalist at least knows what he is looking
for: the original meaning of the text. Often—indeed, I dare say usually—
that is easy to discern and simple to apply.” Once the Court goes beyond
this basis, it necessarily must resort to something other than the determinate understanding of the framers—something such as a political, economic, or philosophical theory as to what a just result would be in the
case. But there are many such theories available—liberal, conservative,
and otherwise—and a justice has no basis for choosing among them
other than his or her own preferences. This ability to choose raises the
specter of activist judging, of the justices superseding the decisions of
the Congress or the states simply on the basis of their own personal
preferences—a “judicial Putsch . . . [that] robs the People of the most
important liberty they asserted in the Declaration of Independence and
won in the Revolution of 1776:  the freedom to govern themselves,”
as Justice Scalia warned in Obergefell v. Hodges (2015), the case that
recognized a constitutional right to same-sex marriage.
The concept of originalism as a solid source of constitutional law is
as attractive as the idea of a text with plain meaning, but nonoriginalist
judges and scholars have identified problems with the concept. There is an
initial problem of our ability to render a historical judgment about original intent or understanding. Reference to “the intention of the framers”
suggests that there existed a definable group of framers and that we
can determine their intentions with a high degree of certainty. But who
Constitutional Law
21
are the framers? The original Constitution was drafted, negotiated, and
voted on in a convention composed of delegates from different states
with different points of view and then ratified by the members of thirteen state legislatures and conventions. The Bill of Rights was drafted
in the First Congress and then submitted to the states for ratification.
Subsequent amendments were drafted by later Congresses and ratified by
still more state legislatures. Whose intent are we to focus on: the drafters
of the provision at issue, others who participated in the debate at the
convention or in the Congress, or members of the ratifying legislatures?
The difficulties of ascertaining historical intention have led some
originalists to shift focus from the intention of the framers to the general
understanding of a constitutional provision at the time of its enactment,
what Justice Scalia described as “the intent that a reasonable person
would gather from the text of the law.” The search for original understanding therefore presumes that we can comprehend the framers’ world
and apply that comprehension to our own world. But nonoriginalists
point out the difficulty of achieving that comprehension. Originalism
presumes that historical intent is a fact, like a physical artifact waiting
to be unearthed, but it is often hard to dig up the truth about an event
two hundred years in the past. Historians know, moreover, that an understanding of the past is always shaped by our own views. It is impossible to achieve knowledge of the past unfiltered by our understanding
of the present; how can we pretend not to know what we do know
about what has happened over the past 200 years? Moreover, any historical understanding we do have must be applied to vastly changed
circumstances. When the authors and ratifiers of the First Amendment
thought of freedom of speech and freedom of press, they could only have
in mind some idea of freedom of speech and press—literally—because
speaking and printing were the only forms of communication available.
How do we translate that understanding to the regulation of, for example, readily accessible pornography on the Internet or pervasive commercial advertising on television?
In dealing with social changes of this magnitude, the Court cannot
simply ascertain and apply an original understanding that could not
actually have been held. Instead, perhaps the Court should look more
broadly for the original principles motivating a particular constitutional
term, a set of provisions, or the Constitution as a whole. The problem
with a strict originalism may be that it looks too narrowly for the intention behind a provision. Some originalists and nonoriginalists suggest
instead that it is possible to constrain the Court’s interpretation of the
Constitution through the development of principles that arise from
the text.
Law 101
22
Consider the due process clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments, which state that no person may be denied life, liberty, or
property without due process of law. Assume that we can tell that at the
time of enactment people held some specific ideas about the meaning
of the clauses. Here we can even refer to the rest of the Bill of Rights
to suggest the content. Liberty includes physical liberty, and the government may not take someone’s liberty away without a trial by jury
in which the defendant is allowed to be represented by counsel, to confront witnesses, and so forth. But the due process clauses would be superfluous if all they did was to restate the protections of the Fourth,
Fifth, and Sixth Amendments. The clauses logically must state a more
general principle about the right of Americans to be protected from
government interference. “Liberty” in this more general understanding
means the right to be left alone to carry on one’s daily life and personal
affairs, and that liberty interest may only be invaded by the government
when it has an important basis for doing so. Thus in determining and
applying the meaning of the due process clause, the Supreme Court can
refer both to the narrower meaning—the right to a jury trial—and the
broader meaning—the right to be free from government interference.
The broader meaning may be particularly useful as the Court faces cases
that the framers would not have considered because the technology or
social conditions that present them had not yet been developed.
Two problems inhere in this approach, however. First, principles such
as the right to be left alone may have even a weaker historical pedigree
than attempts to establish a narrower original intent. All the problems of
reconstructing a historical intention are magnified when the Court tries
to establish a general understanding of a constitutional provision. It is
as if the Court were to ask the framers not just “What did you understand the due process clause to mean?” but also to engage them in dialogue about “What broader conceptions, including those you may never
have explicitly considered, lay behind your thinking?” This inquiry is
unmoored from historical intention and sets the Court loose to try to
attach its own meaning to the constitutional provision without being
bounded by original understanding.
Once the Court begins down this path, the second problem becomes
apparent. For any constitutional provision, it is possible to state principles at different levels of generality as inhering in the provision. The decision in a particular case will depend on the level of generality at which
the Court states the controlling principle. The difficulty is that every
principle, whether broad or narrow, is developed by the Court based on
its own view of what constitutes a sensible reading of the provision at
issue. The Court’s view is informed by the text, its history, its subsequent
Constitutional Law
23
interpretation, and contemporary political and social realities. The risk,
of course, is the problem with which constitutional interpretation began;
in formulating its view, nothing checks the Court except its own good
judgment and, ultimately, political realities.
In the end, the choice between originalism and nonoriginalism and
among their many variations is a choice based on political theory: What
is the nature of the Constitution, why does it command obedience, and
what is the role of the Court in interpreting it? These are difficult questions
to resolve, and history does not answer them for us. Indeed, constitutional historians argue that the framers themselves were not originalists.
Lawyers and statesmen in the late eighteenth century did not hold a
conception of fundamental law as the positive enactment of a legislative body, such as a constitutional convention, whose understanding in
enacting the law should guide its interpretation. And as Justice Kennedy
wrote, the authors of the Constitution and its amendments may have
intended it to be subject to change:
The generations that wrote and ratified the Bill of Rights and the
Fourteenth Amendment did not presume to know the extent of
freedom in all of its dimensions, and so they entrusted to future
generations a charter protecting the right of all persons to enjoy
liberty as we learn its meaning. When new insight reveals discord
between the Constitution’s central protections and a received
legal stricture, a claim to liberty must be addressed. (Obergefell
v. Hodges, 2015)
Does this leave constitutional interpretation at the point where we
simply say that it’s all up to the justices’ points of view and that they
can read into the Constitution their own political views and personal
preferences? Yes and no. “Yes,” in the sense that no plain meaning of the
text, historical evidence, or objective principles determine their decisions.
Constitutional interpretation inevitably involves an act of choice by a
Supreme Court justice among many alternatives, and, as with choices
elsewhere in life, the judge will choose based on his or her sense of what
the right answer is. And “no,” in the sense that a justice is not completely free to reach any decision on any basis he or she wants. Justices
are constrained by the ways the constitutional text has been understood
historically and by the political and legal culture.
This brings us back to the idea that constitutional law is as much
a language and a process as a body of rules and rights. The words of
the Constitution and the ways it has been understood, interpreted,
and argued about inside and outside the courts provide the language
Law 101
24
the justices must use in interpreting and applying the Constitution.
Constitutional law provides a way of framing issues and expressing
arguments. It is possible to say many different things and remain within
the constitutional tradition, but, as with natural languages, some things
cannot be said because the words are unavailable or because they seem
improper or inappropriate. The Court in the Dred Scott case in 1857
could use constitutional terms and constitutional history to declare that
blacks were a “subordinate and inferior class of beings” who could not
be citizens of the United States, but a court today could not do the same
thing. A court today could, however, rule in favor of or against affirmative action because either result would be within the scope of accepted
constitutional discourse; even if we would not agree with the decision or
would find it “wrong,” we would recognize it to be at least arguable in a
way that a modern-day Dred Scott decision would not be.
When it is taken seriously and pursued in good faith, constitutional
interpretation becomes a model of principled debate on important social
issues. It can be conducted at one level removed from immediate political controversies, making it easier to consider consequences, construct
principles, and analogize to other situations—the kinds of things the
legal process is best at. In addition to persuading others, constitutional
analysis can be a way of examining one’s own assumptions and beliefs.
Too often, of course, constitutional debate is not carried on at this level.
Instead, it becomes one more vehicle for the expression of preconceived
beliefs. Because the Constitution is subject to varying interpretations,
justices and others can select the interpretation that best fits the conclusion they wish to reach without engaging in a serious process of
interpretation.
Where Does the Supreme Court Get the Authority to Interpret
the Constitution?
The issue of how the Supreme Court interprets the Constitution is vitally important because of the Court’s power of judicial review. In most
cases, the Court has the final say on what the Constitution means and
how it applies in a particular case. (Every court, federal and state, has
the responsibility and the authority to render decisions on constitutional
issues, but all of those other decisions can ultimately be reviewed by the
U.S. Supreme Court.) We have become so used to judicial review that it
seems a natural, inevitable, and even necessary part of our government
structure. But note how sweeping the power is. The president, Congress,
state legislatures, governors, state courts, state and federal administrative agencies, public officials, and all ordinary citizens are subject to the
Constitutional Law
25
commands of the nine justices on questions of constitutional law. At
the time of the drafting of the Constitution, a power this broad was
unknown anywhere else, and even today it is unusual among judicial
systems around the world.
Remarkably, the power of judicial review is not given to the Supreme
Court in the Constitution itself. Article III states that “The judicial Power
of the United States, shall be vested in one supreme Court, and in such
inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish,” and it extends that power to “all Cases, in Law and Equity, arising
under this Constitution” and to other categories. These provisions are
organizational and jurisdictional. They create the Supreme Court, but
“supreme” means only “highest,” designating a place in the hierarchy
but not the Court’s authority. The power to hear cases arising under the
Constitution is likewise a grant of jurisdiction to hear certain kinds of
cases but not a grant of authority to exercise constitutional review in
hearing them. Article VI states that “This Constitution, and the Laws
of the United States which shall be made in Pursuance thereof . . . shall
be the supreme Law of the Land.” This provision does not tell us either
that the Constitution takes precedence over other “laws of the United
States”—in other words, that the Constitution is superior to acts of
Congress—nor that the Supreme Court, rather than the Congress, the
president, or the states, has the authority to conclusively determine what
the Constitution means.
The power of judicial review was established by the Court’s decision
in the 1803 case of Marbury v.  Madison. Constitutional scholars, by
consensus, regard Marbury as the most important case the Court ever
has decided, and its story bears retelling. As with so many important
legal events in our own time, the story involves important personalities,
partisan politics, and a little intrigue to go along with the law.
Toward the end of George Washington’s presidency, national politics
came to be dominated by two groups: the Federalist Party, which elected
John Adams president and controlled the Congress from 1796 until 1800,
and the Democratic Republican Party (predecessor of today’s Democratic
Party), which would gain a majority in the Congress and elect Thomas
Jefferson in 1800. When it became apparent to the Federalists that they
would lose control of the executive and legislative branches, they moved
to consolidate their power in the judiciary. President Adams nominated
his secretary of state, John Marshall, to be chief justice. The Federalist
Congress also passed legislation to increase the number of lower federal
judges, reduce the number of members of the Supreme Court (to prevent
the incoming Republicans from filling a vacancy), and authorize fortytwo new justices of the peace in the District of Columbia.
Law 101
26
In the last days of his administration, President Adams nominated
faithful party members to the new positions, and the Senate confirmed
them. On the night before Jefferson was to become president, John
Marshall—still serving as secretary of state for the last month of Adams’s
term—performed the secretary’s traditional duty of affixing the Seal of
the United States to the commissions of the new judges. Through inadvertence, a few commissions were not delivered to the new officeholders
that night, and the next day the newly inaugurated President Jefferson
directed his secretary of state, James Madison, to withhold the remaining
commissions, including one belonging to the soon-to-be-famous William
Marbury, who had been appointed as a justice of the peace.
Marbury sued for his commission, bringing what was known as a
writ of mandamus in the Supreme Court. (A writ of mandamus is an
order from a court to a government official directing the official to perform some duty of his or her office.) Although he brought his action in
1801, the new Republican Congress had abolished the 1801 and 1802
terms of the Supreme Court, and therefore the case was not decided until
1803. Finally, the Court decided the case in an opinion by Chief Justice
Marshall who, consistent with the ethical sensibilities of the time, saw
no conflict between his roles as participant in the drama and judge of its
resolution.
In deciding Marbury, Marshall and his Court faced a dilemma. If
Marshall failed to rule that Marbury was entitled to his commission,
he would be acquiescing in an assumption of power by the executive
branch, contrary to his Federalist principles and his belief in the need
to assert the power of the judiciary. But the authority of the Supreme
Court was not yet well established, so if he ordered that the commission
be delivered, Jefferson and Madison might simply refuse to comply,
undermining the authority of the courts. Marshall’s ingenious response
was to sidestep the controversy by claiming the power of judicial review for the Court but exercising it in a way that denied Marbury his
commission.
Marshall’s opinion for the Court first held that Marbury’s appointment
was complete when his commission was signed by the president. At
that point the secretary of state’s duties in sealing and delivering the
commission were ministerial details, and failing to carry them out did
not affect Marbury’s status. Next, because Marbury had a right to his
commission, the appropriate remedy under law was mandamus directed
to the secretary. The catch arose at the third step. Was the Supreme Court
the proper forum in which to seek this remedy?
Article III granted the Supreme Court original jurisdiction (i.e., the
authority to hear cases in the first instance) in cases in which a foreign
Constitutional Law
27
diplomat or a state was a party; in all other cases, it had only the authority to hear appeals from lower courts. The Judiciary Act of 1789 had
expanded the Court’s original jurisdiction to include the power to issue
writs of mandamus against federal officials. Marbury asserted that the
Court had jurisdiction of his suit against Madison under the Judiciary
Act. In the opinion’s tour de force, Chief Justice Marshall ruled that the
Judiciary Act had impermissibly extended the Court’s original jurisdiction beyond that granted by Article III and therefore the Court could not
grant relief to Marbury because it did not have jurisdiction of the case.
This satisfied the immediate concerns of the Republicans, but the great
significance of the case lay in the Court’s assumption to itself of the final
authority to determine if the Judiciary Act or any other act of Congress
was constitutional. Thus the opinion ceded the immediate issue while
profoundly enhancing the Court’s authority.
For Marshall, whether the Court had the power to review the constitutionality of legislation was an easy question. The people created the
Constitution to be fundamental, supreme, and permanent law. Part of
the constitutional scheme is that the federal government is a government
of limited powers. The branches may exercise only the authority that the
people have delegated to them in the Constitution. Therefore, any act
that is contrary to the Constitution or beyond the powers enumerated
in it is void. Article III’s grant of limited jurisdiction was exclusive, so
Congress had no constitutional authority to expand the Court’s jurisdiction to include mandamus actions.
So far, so good. The key comes at the next stage of the argument. The
Constitution is fundamental law, so it is law, and the interpretation and
application of law is the traditional domain of the courts.
It is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department
to say what the law is. . . . So if a law be in opposition to the
constitution; if both the law and the constitution apply to a
particular case, so that the court must either decide the case
conformably to the law, disregarding the constitution; or
conformably to the constitution, disregarding the law; the court must
determine which of these conflicting rules governs the cases. This is
of the very essence of judicial duty.
Thus Marshall neatly concludes the syllogism. The Constitution is law.
Courts interpret law. Therefore courts interpret the Constitution. But
what was obvious to Marshall was not obvious to others. The law
that the courts traditionally interpret and the law embodied in the
Constitution may be two entirely different things. If the Constitution is
Law 101
28
fundamental law, perhaps it should not be treated the same as ordinary
statutes and cases. Precisely because it is fundamental, constitutional interpretation might just as easily be left to the other branches of government. Congress can make a judgment about the constitutionality of a
statute when it enacts one, as with the Judiciary Act, and it would not be
obviously inconsistent with the constitutional scheme for the courts to
consider that judgment to be definitive.
Despite the lack of logical rigor in Marbury v. Madison, it was the first
strong pronouncement of the principle of judicial review. Although the
Court exercised sparingly its power to declare congressional enactments
unconstitutional in the decades after Marbury—it didn’t invalidate another federal statute until the Dred Scott case in 1857—the power had
been asserted and initially acquiesced to by the other branches. Or perhaps it was because the power was exercised sparingly that it took root,
since the Court was frequently under attack in the early years of the
nineteenth century.
The Court consolidated its power of judicial review by asserting a similar authority over state law. In 1810 the Court first invalidated a state
statute in Fletcher v. Peck on the grounds that the statute, an attempt
to rescind title to land that had been fraudulently conveyed, violated
the contract clause. Then in Martin v. Hunter’s Lessee in 1816, another
case involving a land dispute, the highest court in Virginia ruled for
one party but the U.S. Supreme Court, on appeal, ruled differently. The
Virginia court refused to obey the Supreme Court’s mandate, asserting
that it could decide the issue for itself and that the federal Judiciary
Act, which granted appellate jurisdiction to the Court, was unconstitutional. When the case returned to the Supreme Court, the Court, in an
opinion by Justice Joseph Story, reasserted its constitutional authority.
In adopting the Constitution the states had ceded some of their sovereignty to the federal government. The federal judicial power included all
cases involving constitutional interpretation, and the supremacy clause
made the federal law preeminent. Finally, in Cohens v. Virginia (1821)
the Court extended its power to encompass the review of state criminal
proceedings. Unless state proceedings were subject to review in the federal courts, the states could thwart federal law and policy by punishing
individuals who asserted valid constitutional rights.
Thus by the end of John Marshall’s tenure as chief justice in 1834,
the foundation had been laid for Supreme Court review of the constitutionality of the acts of state and federal legislative bodies and executive
officials. Since then it has been recognized that the Court’s power to
interpret the Constitution is immense. That power is, however, neither
unique nor unlimited. Every major public official takes an oath of office
Constitutional Law
29
pledging to uphold the Constitution and therefore is required to interpret it in the performance of his or her duties. A  senator weighs the
constitutionality of a bill in deciding whether to vote for it, the president
decides whether ordering drone attacks on terrorists is within his constitutional authority as commander-in-chief, and even a police officer on
the beat decides whether frisking a suspect is constitutional. To that extent, the real question is not who interprets the Constitution but whose
interpretation counts the most.
Throughout American history, presidents and other officials have
asserted their independent authority to determine what the Constitution
requires and to act on those determinations. Thomas Jefferson regarded
the idea of “judges as the ultimate arbiters of all constitutional questions”
to be “a very dangerous doctrine indeed, and one which would place us
under the despotism of an oligarchy”; because he considered the Sedition
Act of 1798 to be unconstitutional, he exercised one of the powers
granted to the president by the Constitution and pardoned defendants
convicted under it, even though the act had been applied and upheld by
the court. Abraham Lincoln famously denounced the Dred Scott decision, which held that blacks were not citizens, declaring that it would
not bind him as a member of Congress or president. Recent presidents,
especially George W. Bush, have issued many signing statements when
signing bills into law that challenge the constitutionality of provisions
of the bills and assert their intention not to enforce them. Today some
scholars argue for a revival of popular constitutionalism, in which the
political branches of government have more of a role in interpreting the
Constitution.
When the Court and other branches come into conflict in interpreting
the Constitution, however, the Court generally triumphs. Consider two
illustrations of attempted and potential resistance and its ultimate futility.
The Court’s decision desegregating public schools in Brown v. Board of
Education was met in many southern states by official and unofficial
resistance. Some southern legislatures, for example, enacted resolutions
“nullifying” the decision and tried to avoid its effects by schemes such
as refusing to fund desegregated schools. In Cooper v. Aaron (1958),
the Court rejected all of these efforts and reasserted the principle of
Marbury, that “the federal judiciary is supreme in the exposition of the
law of the Constitution, and that principle has ever since been respected
by this Court and the Country as a permanent and indispensable feature of our constitutional system.” The southern states’ defiance of the
Court’s power was so challenging to the constitutional order that all
nine justices took the extraordinary step of attaching their names to the
opinion individually.
Law 101
30
In the Watergate era, the courts were faced with a number of cases
arising from the investigations into the illegal activities of President
Nixon and his cronies. In United States v. Nixon (1974), for example, the
Court held that the courts, not the president, could determine whether
evidence sought by the Watergate special prosecutor was validly subject
to the president’s claim of executive privilege. More remarkable than the
Court’s pronouncement was President Nixon’s acceptance of it. Even
though the chain of events would lead to his resignation in disgrace, the
president could not challenge the established practice of judicial review.
Since the Constitution covers the entire scope of government affairs,
judicial review could conceivably encompass every aspect of government, and the logic of Marbury v.  Madison suggests that the Court
should engage in constitutional review of any case. Nevertheless, the
Court has concluded that as a matter of constitutional requirement or
judicial prudence, there are some issues that are committed to Congress
or the president without judicial review. The Court is limited in what it
can do as a practical matter as a judicial body and as a political matter in
assessing its responsibilities relative to the other branches, so it refrains
from deciding political questions.
To take an example, there was a spate of litigation during the Vietnam
War that sought to declare the war illegal because Congress had never
formally declared war, or to prevent the government from prosecuting
some parts of the war such as the bombing of Cambodia. Following
Marbury, one might consider this a straightforward issue of constitutional interpretation. Does the Constitution require Congress to declare
war before the president commits troops, or may the president conduct
and Congress fund an undeclared war? But would deciding that question
engage the Court in policymaking of the kind that is only or best left
to the other branches of government? If so, it is a nonjusticiable political question that the courts cannot decide. Although none of the cases
reached the Supreme Court, the lower courts held in these cases—and in
subsequent cases involving President Reagan’s military engagement in El
Salvador and the first Persian Gulf war—that decisions about war and
peace were committed to the president and the Congress.
What Powers Does Constitutional Law Give to the Rest of the Federal
Government?
The Supreme Court has the power to review state and federal legislation to determine if the laws are constitutional. The federal court system
also has jurisdiction over many nonconstitutional cases including ordinary civil cases arising under federal statutes or involving citizens of
Constitutional Law
31
different states and criminal cases such as bank robbery, drug offenses,
and other violations of federal law. What does constitutional law say
about the powers of the other branches of the federal government—the
legislative branch (the Congress) and the executive branch (headed by
the president)?
Recall the basic question with which constitutional law struggles. How
do we empower a government to do what we cannot do for ourselves,
while making sure that it does not become so strong that it threatens our
liberties? The Constitution’s answer grew out of a particular historical
situation.
The framers of the Constitution responded to the widespread perception that the government created under the Articles of Confederation
was too weak. Under the Articles, Congress had no power to tax, to
issue a single national currency, or to control trade. There was neither a
strong executive—at that time the president was a member of Congress
with limited powers—nor a federal court system. Conflict between the
states was widespread, with one state imposing tariffs on goods imported
from another, and the national government’s inability to repay the huge
Revolutionary War debt precipitated a financial crisis. Accordingly, the
national government under the Articles was widely perceived to be a
failure.
The problem was the inadequacy of the federal government to deal
with the situation, so the response was obvious and was adopted by
the constitutional convention of 1787: Give greater powers to the national government, powers that would be sufficient for it to control
conflicts among the states, order the nation’s financial affairs, raise and
pay an army, and conduct foreign relations. But that only answered part
of the basic question. The framers also were deeply concerned that the
new national government might invade the proper province of state
governments or threaten the basic rights of the people. Therefore, the
federal government was conceived as a government of expanded but limited authority, having only the powers “enumerated” in the Constitution
itself. Implicit in the constitutional structure and made explicit in the
Tenth Amendment, the concept of enumerated powers stated that “The
powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to
the people.” And the new government could exercise its powers only
through a system we know as checks and balances or separation of
powers. A majority could not run roughshod over the interests of the
states or the rights of the people because legislation had to come out of
a bicameral legislature and be acceded to by the president. To add a final
degree of protection against an overly powerful national government,
Law 101
32
the specific guarantees of the Bill of Rights were drafted by the First
Congress and adopted in 1791.
The government lived up to these expectations in the first years under
the Constitution. The new government addressed the most pressing issues
of the time and the most fundamental requirements of a nation. The First
Congress created the essential government departments—State, War,
Treasury, the Post Office, the office of Attorney General, and a system
of federal courts—and dealt with important economic issues, including
imposing taxes, chartering a national bank, taking a census, establishing
a monetary system, and creating patent and copyright laws. Up until the
Civil War, though, the size of the government was still minuscule.
But look at what has happened to this government of limited,
enumerated powers. Ask someone today what “the government” is and
they are likely to think first of the national government. The president is
often described in the media as “the most powerful person in the world.”
Congress legislates on nearly everything, from the protection of endangered species to taxes on imported goods. The federal bureaucracy, two
million strong, collects taxes, administers Social Security and Medicare,
reviews the safety and effectiveness of pharmaceuticals, manages more
than half a billion acres of federal lands, and spends three and a half
trillion dollars each year. The states, meanwhile, do important things
such as operate public schools and maintain the roads, but their activities seem dwarfed by the presence of the federal government.
Every step of the transformation of this government of enumerated
powers—from one of tiny scope and limited influence to one that
penetrates virtually every aspect of modern life—has been sanctioned
through interpretations of the Constitution. The ways in which it did
so illustrate how the Constitution is interpreted and applied. The vague
constitutional text covers situations unforeseen at the time of its drafting,
and the Supreme Court has to respond both to the text itself and to
changing political, economic, and social values in considering the appropriate scope of government power. The basic elements of the story are, of
course, a tremendous expansion of the power of the federal government,
relying on broad interpretations of the enumeration of powers in the
constitutional text and balancing of the authority of the executive and
legislative branches, and the federal government and the states, resulting
in more a sharing of powers than a separation of powers.
The fundamental grants of government authority are given to Congress
in Article I, section 8, in seventeen specific clauses and one general clause.
“Specific” is not the same as “limited,” however. The government’s
powers under section 8 include the powers to “lay and collect taxes,”
“borrow money,” “declare War,” and “raise and support Armies”—and,
Constitutional Law
33
in the residual authority clause 18, “[t]o make all Laws which shall be
necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers,
and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of
the United States.”
Consider as an example of the expansion of federal power and the
sharing of power among the branches the ways in which the legislative or executive branches have attempted to exercise power under the
commerce clause and how the Supreme Court has responded by weighing
the constitutionality of the exercise.
Article I, section 8, clause 3, gives Congress the power “[t]o regulate Commerce with foreign nations, and among the several States, and
with the Indian Tribes.” Under the Articles of Confederation the federal government had little power either to regulate interstate or international commerce or to prevent individual states from interfering with
it. The commerce clause was designed to correct this situation, enabling
the federal government to exercise authority over the national economy
internally and externally. The breadth of this power depends on the
interpretation of the term “Commerce . . . among the several States.”
This could be read simply to prevent interstate conflicts of the kind that
prevailed under the Articles where, for example, one state taxed goods
brought in from another. Instead, Congress has used the commerce clause
as an authorization to extend federal regulatory power throughout the
economy and to place a corresponding limitation on state power. The
Supreme Court has usually acquiesced in this assertion of authority, with
occasional notable exceptions.
Like so many other constitutional principles, the scope of the
commerce clause was first broadly defined in an opinion by Chief
Justice John Marshall. In Gibbons v. Ogden (1824), the New York legislature had granted Robert Fulton (the inventor of the steamboat) and
a partner the exclusive right to operate steamboats on New York waters, and Fulton had franchised a portion of this monopoly to Ogden.
Gibbons began to operate a competing steamboat line between New
Jersey and New York under a federal statute, and Ogden sued to enjoin
Gibbons from infringing on his franchise. The Supreme Court held that
New York’s grant of a monopoly conflicted with an act of Congress concerning the licensing of ships, and therefore it was void because of the
supremacy clause. Nevertheless, Marshall took the occasion to expound
on the power of the national government under the commerce clause.
Marshall identified three elements of Congress’s power over interstate commerce and broadly defined each of them. First was commerce.
Ogden’s counsel argued that “commerce” meant only traffic, or things
moving from one state to another, which would exclude navigation. For
Law 101
34
Marshall, traffic was only a part of commerce: “Commerce, undoubtedly is traffic, but it is something more, it is intercourse. It describes the
commercial intercourse between nations, and parts of nations, in all its
branches.”
The next term to be defined was “among the several states.” “Among”
did not mean merely “between,” according to Marshall. “A thing which
is ‘among’ others is intermingled with them; therefore commerce among
the states cannot stop at the external boundary line of each state but
may be introduced into the interior.” Congress had no power to regulate
commerce that occurred wholly within a state, but whether an activity
was wholly within a state was measured by its effects, not its physical
presence. Even if an activity was carried on entirely within the borders
of a single state, if it affected commerce beyond the borders of the state,
it was interstate commerce.
The final step was to define “regulate.” Marshall determined that
“This power, like all others vested in Congress, is complete in itself, may
be exercised to its utmost extent, and acknowledges no limitations, other
than are prescribed in the constitution itself.”
Thus the Court concluded that Congress had constitutional authority
to regulate commercial activities that had effects beyond the borders of
a single state. But the definition of this authority by the Supreme Court
could come only in response to congressional assertion of the authority
and challenges to it, and for a half century after Gibbons v. Ogden, the
Court had little occasion to further consider the definition.
In the following half century—from 1887 to 1937—the Court took
a narrower tack even as Congress attempted to exercise the commerce
power more vigorously. This was the era of bigness, with the rise of U.S.
Steel, Standard Oil, and other new concentrations of wealth and economic power. Congress and state legislatures acted to control the new
economic powers, but as the Court became more conservative, it became
less willing to acknowledge legislative authority over commerce. In defining the scope of the commerce clause, it abandoned Marshall’s focus
on the effects of commerce and adopted a formal, definitional approach.
Marshall had decided in Gibbons v. Ogden that commerce was more
than traffic, but in an 1895 case the Court came close to saying that
commerce was only traffic. Congress had enacted the Sherman Antitrust
Act to control the new monopolies of major industries. In United States
v. E. C. Knight the Court limited the Sherman Act by a narrow interpretation of the scope of Congress’s power under the commerce clause.
The American Sugar Refining Company had acquired a monopoly of
the sugar industry, controlling more than 90 percent of the country’s
sugar production. But, the Court said, the federal government could not
Constitutional Law
35
constitutionally regulate this monopoly because it was a monopoly of
manufacturing, not commerce:  “Commerce succeeds to manufacture,
and is not part of it. . . . The fact that an article is manufactured for
export to another State does not itself make it an article of commerce.”
The Supreme Court’s conservative interpretations of the commerce
clause reached their most extreme when the Court struck down some
key pieces of New Deal legislation designed to bring the country out of
the Great Depression. In Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States (1935),
for example, the Court struck down the central element of the plan for
economic recovery, the National Industrial Recovery Act. Among other
things, the act empowered the president to enforce codes of competition approved by local trade associations. Schechter Poultry Corp. concerned the code of competition for the poultry industry in New York
City. Poultry undoubtedly was produced in mass quantities, shipped in
interstate commerce, and had important national economic effects. The
act attempted to regulate the sale of poultry, however, and this was beyond the scope of the commerce clause. In language reminiscent of E.C.
Knight, the Court defined commerce narrowly: “So far as the poultry
here in question is concerned, the flow in interstate commerce had
ceased. The poultry had come to a permanent rest within the State.”
The Court’s invalidation of the New Deal legislation presented a
challenge to the other branches of government, and, after President
Franklin Roosevelt’s resounding reelection victory in 1936, he took
up the challenge. FDR proposed his famous court-packing plan, under
which he would have been authorized to appoint one new justice to the
court for each current justice who was seventy years old and had served
on the court for ten years. Adoption of the plan would have enabled him
to appoint six new justices to create a solid liberal majority that would
uphold New Deal legislation.
The debate over the court-packing plan was fierce, and it clearly
demonstrated the ambiguities of the Court’s constitutional role.
Progressives were outraged by the Court’s ability to thwart the will of an
overwhelming popular majority and saw the plan as a means of reining
in an undemocratic institution. But the Court had many defenders, even
among those who did not agree with its decisions; if there was more
to constitutional law than simple politics, the Court had to be immune
from this kind of direct political intervention in its decisions.
In the end the court-packing plan failed in Congress but still influenced
the Supreme Court. By the middle of 1937 middle-of-the-road Justice
Owen Roberts became a more consistent upholder of regulatory legislation, and over the next few years the notoriously conservative “Four
Horsemen” (James McReynolds, Willis Van Devanter, Pierce Butler,
Law 101
36
and George Sutherland) retired, to be replaced by justices appointed by
Roosevelt and more sympathetic to his legislative program. The result
was a shift in interpretation of the commerce clause to a standard of
near-total deference to congressional power, evocative of Marshall’s emphasis on effects, which remained in place until very recently.
In Wickard v.  Filburn (1942), for example, the Court specifically
referred to Marshall’s analysis of the commerce power in Gibbons
v.  Ogden. The secretary of agriculture fined Filburn, a small farmer,
$117.11 for growing 239 bushels of wheat over his allotment, even
though he intended to use the wheat exclusively on his own farm and
not sell it in commerce, interstate or otherwise. Whether the activity was
production or manufacturing on the one hand, or marketing and distribution on the other, was irrelevant; the issue for the Court was the effect
on commerce, not the character of the activity. The key to determining
the scope of Congress’s power under the commerce clause was whether
the regulated activity would have an effect on interstate commerce, even
if it was not interstate commerce itself. If Filburn grew and consumed
his own wheat, he would not buy wheat on the market. If many small
farmers did the same, their cumulative decisions would have a substantial effect on the national market in wheat, so it would affect interstate
commerce and therefore was a proper subject for congressional action.
For a half century following the New Deal transformation, the
Supreme Court acquiesced in nearly every application of the commerce
power by the Congress, including legislation setting minimum wages
and maximum hours of work, prohibiting racial discrimination in
places of commerce, regulating the sale of food, and criminalizing loan
sharking, among many others. In Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining and
Reclamation Association (1981), Justice Rehnquist summarized this
history and suggested that “one of the greatest ‘fictions’ of our federal
system is that the Congress exercises only those powers delegated to
it” and “the manner in which this Court has construed the Commerce
Clause amply illustrates the extent of this fiction.” As new appointments
shifted the majority on the Court, a new federalism emerged that limited
Congress’s power under the commerce clause for the first time since the
New Deal.
In 1990 Congress enacted a statute making it a federal crime to possess
a gun within 1,000 feet of a school. Alfonso Lopez was charged under
the statute for carrying a handgun into his high school, and he moved
to dismiss the indictment on the basis that enactment of the statute was
beyond any of the enumerated powers of Congress. The government
defended the statute as an exercise of the commerce power; possession
of a gun in a school zone may result in violent crime, the costs of violent
Constitutional Law
37
crime are substantial, and the presence of guns in schools threatens
the learning environment, which results in a less productive citizenry,
so possession of a gun in a school zone may substantially affect interstate commerce. The Court, in an opinion by Chief Justice Rehnquist,
rejected the government’s position, holding that the possession of a
gun in a school zone was not economic activity, unlike the growing of
wheat in Wickard v. Filburn, and so it was not within the scope of the
commerce clause. Particularly in the absence of congressional findings
about the burden that carrying guns imposed a special burden on interstate commerce, if this statute was held valid almost any other statute
would be constitutional too, including those that invaded subjects traditionally within the province of the states, such as crime, education, and
childrearing (United States v. Lopez, 1995).
The strength of the new federalism became clear in 2013 when the
Court considered the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act (ACA),
popularly known as Obamacare, the signature health insurance reform
of the Obama administration (National Federation of Independent
Business v.  Sebelius, 2012). The most controversial provision of the
act was the “individual mandate,” which required individuals either to
maintain health insurance coverage or to pay a penalty on their income
taxes for failing to do so. In an unusual lineup for the Court, four conservative justices joined Chief Justice John Roberts in holding that the
mandate was outside Congress’s commerce clause power, and four liberal justices joined Roberts in holding that the mandate was constitutional under Congress’s power to tax.
The individual mandate was designed to address some of the economic problems of the health insurance market. For example, hospitals
sometimes are required to provide treatment whether their patients have
insurance or not; to pay for that treatment, the hospitals pass on the
costs through higher rates in other cases, and insurers who pay those
rates pass on the costs to their customers. Also, the ACA prevented
insurers from denying coverage to people with preexisting conditions,
which could encourage people to wait until they are sick to buy insurance, again increasing the cost of insurance to everyone. Therefore an
individual’s decision to maintain coverage had an effect on the market
for health insurance and the cost of the health care system overall, a
system that everyone will use at one time or another. Because of this
effect, the government argued, the ACA was much like the regulation of
wheat growing in Wickard v. Filburn and was constitutional because it
regulated activity that had a substantial effect on interstate commerce.
Chief Justice Roberts disagreed. The Constitution grants the federal
government the power to “regulate commerce,” but that presupposes
Law 101
38
that there is commerce to be regulated. The individual mandate does not
regulate commercial activity. “It instead compels individuals to become
active in purchasing a product, on the ground that their failure to do so
effects interstate commerce.” Wickard was different because the farmer
was involved in growing wheat—an activity, not an inactivity—which
had an effect on the market for wheat. The analogy that often was used
in debate about the case, to which Roberts alluded in his opinion, was
that Congress can regulate the sale of vegetables but it cannot compel
everyone to purchase vegetables because doing so would increase vegetable consumption, which would increase heath and decrease obesity,
thereby lowering health care costs.
Although the individual mandate was beyond the commerce power,
Roberts did uphold it as within the government’s taxing power. The
ACA designated the payment uninsured individuals must make as a
“penalty,” not a “tax,” but it is to be collected by the IRS through the
income tax system. Under the taxing power, the activity/inactivity distinction of the commerce clause was irrelevant, and it resembled other
tax incentives, such as the mortgage deduction that encourages the
purchase of a home.
Commentators had much to say about Chief Justice Roberts’ opinion
beyond its constitutional analysis. The normally conservative Roberts
further limited the scope of the commerce clause but used another
route to uphold this landmark piece of legislation. Some viewed it as
an exercise in overall judicial restraint, drawing fine lines and narrowly
construing precedents. Others, reflecting on the controversies about the
early New Deal Court, wondered if the opinion was partially motivated
by a concern for the Court’s role; the opinion limited the commerce
power but avoided striking down a major and politically controversial
piece of legislation.
The president’s specific powers under the Constitution include acting
as commander-in-chief of the armed forces; appointing ambassadors,
judges, and executive officials with the advice and consent of the senate;
and recommending and vetoing legislation. Moreover, although Congress
possesses only the “legislative Powers herein granted,” the Constitution
states that “The executive Power shall be vested in a President,” which
suggests, and the Supreme Court has held, that the president has all
powers normally exercised by a chief executive even if those powers are
not specifically enumerated in the Constitution. Within the scope of the
president’s powers, the president’s authority is expansive. For example,
in 2002 Congress enacted a statute permitting citizens born there to
have their place of birth designated on their passports as “Jerusalem,
Israel.” The Supreme Court invalidated the statute as infringing on the
Constitutional Law
39
president’s sole authority to recognize the sovereignty of foreign nations
(Zivotofsky v. Kerry, 2015).
The president’s enumerated and general executive powers are great but
neither unlimited nor independent of the powers of Congress. Debates
about the scope of federal power and of the president’s executive authority are most intense in times of crisis. The extent of the government’s
power to defend the nation and the president’s role as commander-inchief have long been controversial, and the controversy intensified after
the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
The Constitution grants to Congress the powers “to declare war” and
to finance and regulate the armed forces, and it designates the president
as “Commander in Chief.” Congress and the president therefore can act
together, when Congress declares war, which the president then carries
out. Congress has declared war only six times in the nation’s history, beginning with the War of 1812 and most recently during World War II;
the Civil War and Korean War were among the many undeclared wars.
More often Congress fails to formally declare war but in some other
way authorizes the president to send troops into combat. Following the
September 11 attacks, Congress passed an Authorization for the Use of
Military Force resolution enabling the president to use the armed forces
against those responsible for the attacks and to prevent future acts of
terrorism; presidents since then have used that resolution to justify not
only the invasions of Afghanistan in 2001 and Iraq in 2003 but also military action there and in a dozen other countries.
The president also often takes military action without congressional
approval or seeks approval after action is taken; by one account, that
has happened more than 130 times, beginning with President Adams’s
use of the navy to capture French ships that had attacked American merchant vessels and extending at least through President Clinton’s ordering
an air campaign to stop ethnic cleansing in Kosovo. Presidents have justified actions like these by their inherent power to defend the nation
against attacks, by the need to protect Americans caught in conflicts
abroad, and by obligations to international organizations such as the
United Nations and NATO.
How far the president’s power as commander-in-chief extends when
he acts without Congressional authorization has been the most controversial issue. One approach was suggested in the Steel Seizure Cases
during the Korean War. President Truman ordered the seizure by the
federal government of the nation’s steel mills to maintain production in
the face of a threatened strike. The Supreme Court held that in the absence of Congressional authorization (indeed, in the face of Congress’s
refusal to authorize seizure to settle labor disputes), Truman had no such
Law 101
40
authority as commander-in-chief or under his general executive power.
Concurring in the result, Justice Robert Jackson suggested a flexible,
functional test for analyzing presidential power that has been frequently
cited. When the president acts pursuant to congressional authorization,
his power is greatest; when he acts contrary to the express or implied
will of Congress, his power is at its lowest; when he acts on an issue
Congress has not addressed, relying on his independent powers as president, he operates in “a zone of twilight,” where the scope of his power
depends “on the imperatives of events and contemporary imponderables”
(Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer, 1952).
Congress also has tried to rein in the president’s power through
the War Powers Resolution of 1973, enacted over President Nixon’s
veto as a response to the controversy over the Vietnam War. The resolution requires the president to consult with Congress when sending
troops into combat situations and to withdraw forces after sixty days
unless Congress has approved. Whether the resolution unconstitutionally restricts the president’s power has never been tested, and probably
never will be, because it raises political questions the Supreme Court has
been reluctant to take up. In the meantime, presidents have sometimes
respected the resolution and sometimes not; President Clinton used it
when he sent troops to restore Haitian president Jean-Bertrand Aristide
after a coup in 1994 but failed to do so when he ordered air strikes
against Al Qaeda bases in Sudan and Afghanistan in 1998.
The power to make war also can conflict with constitutionally protected
civil liberties. During the Civil War, President Lincoln suspended habeas corpus to enable the indefinite detention of those hindering the
war. When Supreme Court Justice Roger Taney issued a writ of habeas
corpus ordering that a Confederate sympathizer named John Merryman
be brought to court or released, Lincoln directed the military officers
holding Merryman to ignore the order, claiming the constitutional authority to act when Congress was not in session. Taney did not pursue
the matter, and subsequently Congress endorsed the suspension of the
writ, as the Constitution permits it to do.
Following the September 11 attacks, American forces seized
combatants and others believed to be tied to Al Qaeda (including
American citizens) and detained them both in the United States and at the
naval base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. The administration of President
George W. Bush claimed that the resolution authorizing military force
and, perhaps more importantly, the president’s inherent powers as chief
executive and commander-in-chief authorized a broad series of actions
beyond the control of peacetime law and beyond the review of the
courts. His Justice Department issued a legal opinion that stated: “In
Constitutional Law
41
wartime, it is for the President alone to decide what methods to use
to best prevail against the enemy.” Accordingly, he initially claimed the
constitutional power to order the torture of prisoners to obtain intelligence even though Congress had prohibited such action in its adoption
of the United Nations Convention against Torture; after extended publicity, the Justice Department withdrew its opinion and the president
disavowed that claim. The administration also claimed that prisoners
held at Guantanamo Bay and even U.S. citizens designated as “enemy
combatants” were beyond the reach of the courts. (After September 11,
the government also expanded its use of wiretapping, interception of
email, and other electronic surveillance; those measures presented issues
under the Fourth Amendment and are discussed in Chapter 9.)
In a pair of cases in 2004, the Supreme Court rejected those claims,
asserting that the president’s powers were limited even during the
war on terror and that the courts had the authority to determine the
scope of those powers. Particularly because of the extent of control of
Guantanamo Bay by the United States, the federal courts had jurisdiction “to determine the legality of the Executive’s potentially indefinite
detention of individuals who claim to be wholly innocent of wrongdoing” (Rasul v. Bush, 2004). Yaser Hamdi, an American citizen seized
in Afghanistan for having fought with the Taliban, likewise was entitled
to receive notice of the basis for classifying him as an enemy combatant
and to contest the claims before a neutral decision maker. The president,
pursuant to the congressional resolution, could designate a citizen as
an enemy combatant and order his detention, but even an enemy combatant could not necessarily be held indefinitely, and not without being
given due process (Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 2004).
In response to Rasul and Hamdi, Congress enacted the Detainee
Treatment Act of 2005 and the Military Commissions Act of 2006 to
prescribe procedures for the review of detainees’ status and to restrict
review by the courts of the military’s decisions on detainees, specifically
excluding habeas corpus actions. In Boumedienne v. Bush (2008), the
Supreme Court declared that the procedures and restrictions were unconstitutional. The Constitution provides that habeas corpus may be
suspended by Congress only “when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion
the public Safety may require it,” and the statutes neither hewed to the
requirements of the suspension clause nor provided procedures that
were an adequate substitute for habeas corpus. A detainee whose fate
was being determined by a military commission could have a “representative” who was neither a lawyer nor even the detainee’s advocate,
the evidence presented by the government would be presumed valid, the
detainee could have access only to unclassified portions of the evidence,
Law 101
42
and he could present only limited, “reasonably available” evidence of
his own.
The post-9/11 cases are especially dramatic, but they illustrate a more
general point. The powers of the president and Congress always are
limited by the commands of the Bill of Rights. For example, Congress
may not enact statutes that impose on religious liberty (discussed in
Chapter 3), and it may not impose restrictions on the use of property
that so diminish its value that they constitute a taking of the property
(discussed in Chapter 7).
What Powers Do the States Have Under Constitutional Law?
The story so far has been the creation of a national government strong
enough to correct the weaknesses of the government under the Articles
of Confederation, the limitation of the powers of that government by
the doctrine of enumerated powers, and the subsequent expansion of its
powers through broad interpretation of specific grants of authority such
as the commerce clause. But what about the states? The states existed
before the national government was created, and state delegates drafted
and ratified the Constitution. As the power of the federal government
has expanded, how do the states fit into the constitutional scheme?
As with every other issue of constitutional law, the answer to this
question is not simple. The text of the Constitution says little about state
authority, explicitly granting few powers to state governments and explicitly placing few limits on federal authority vis-à-vis the states. As
times have changed and the federal and state governments have asserted
their authority in different ways, the Supreme Court has struggled to define the areas in which each may properly operate.
Even though the Constitution doesn’t say so, federalism—the idea that
governmental power is shared by state and national governments—is a
basic postulate of our constitutional system. The federal government is
a government of enumerated powers, exercising only those powers specifically granted to it in the Constitution—though we have seen that that
limitation is often more theoretical than real, given the Supreme Court’s
acquiescence in the expansion of federal authority. The states, on the other
hand, are assumed to exercise the general police power, or the power to
do all of the usual things that governments do. The courts have developed a substantial body of law on the meaning of the enumerated powers
of the federal government (such as the commerce power), but there is no
comparable body of law on the authority of state governments, because
their powers are general rather than enumerated. The Constitution does
not specify the general authority of state governments because it doesn’t
Constitutional Law
43
have to—everyone understood the concepts at the time of the drafting,
as we do today from current political situations and the necessary implication of the constitutional structure.
It should be easy to reconcile state and federal powers. The states have
general authority, while the national government has limited authority
specifically enumerated in the Constitution. The Tenth Amendment
makes clear that the authority of the states extends beyond that of the
national government: “The powers not delegated to the United States
by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved
to the States respectively, or to the people.” But the Constitution also
contains a supremacy clause, in Article VI, section 2: “This Constitution,
and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in Pursuance
thereof . . . shall be the supreme Law of the Land; and the Judges in
every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing in the Constitution or
Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding.” Thus the states
have general authority, and the federal government has limited authority,
but within its authority the federal government is supreme. So how are
the courts to draw the line between federal and state authority?
For a long time, from the post–Civil War years to the beginning of the
New Deal, the Supreme Court tended to limit federal authority in favor
of state authority. This approach was a corollary of the Court’s conservative approach (discussed earlier), which limited the scope of federal
powers under the commerce clause and other provisions. The concept
was called dual sovereignty. Both the national and state governments
had their proper sphere of authority, and neither could invade the
other’s sphere. Frequently the Court would invalidate congressional
enactments by finding that the statute in question was beyond the federal government’s enumerated powers or that it invaded the powers of
the states. In Hamner v. Dagenhart (1918), for example, the Court held
that a federal law prohibiting the shipment in interstate commerce of
goods produced with child labor exceeded the commerce power, and
in Keller v. United States (1909) it ruled that a federal prohibition on
houses of prostitution invaded the states’ police power.
The concept of dual sovereignty and the broad scope for state authority it entailed has faded. The possibility of clearly distinguishing between areas of sovereignty was more congenial to the nineteenth-century
mind than to legal thinkers of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries,
and, after FDR, the Great Depression, and the New Deal, the Court was
more willing to acquiesce in the expansion of federal authority. Today
the allocation of authority between the national and state governments is
controlled by the doctrine of preemption, including the puzzling effect of
dormant federal powers. Where the federal government acts, it preempts
Law 101
44
state law that actually or potentially conflicts with the federal law. And
sometimes where the federal government has not acted but could act—
where its power is dormant—state legislation also is barred.
The preemption of state law that is inconsistent with federal law is
easy to understand as an operation of the supremacy clause. Where the
Federal Arbitration Act says that parties to a contract can agree to submit
a dispute to arbitration notwithstanding any contrary provision of state
law, a California statute that attempted to invalidate such an agreement
is preempted (Southland Corp. v. Keating, 1984). The difficult question is
to what extent state and federal laws that are not obviously inconsistent
still conflict to such an extent that the state law must fall. Sometimes
the Supreme Court will be deferential to the concerns of federalism and
interpret the statutes to avoid a conflict; at other times the Court will
be more sensitive to national interests, particularly where it perceives a
need for national uniformity. In Cipollone v. Liggett Group, Inc. (1992),
the Court held that federal law on cigarette labeling preempted state
tort liability for failure to warn of the dangers of smoking. But in Altria
Group, Inc. v. Good (2008), it concluded that a federal statute did not
preempt a state fraud claim against cigarette manufacturers for deceptively advertising that “light” cigarettes were less harmful. In both cases,
the Court focused on Congress’s express and implied intent in enacting
the law; in Cipollone the state law conflicted with the federally required
health warning on cigarettes, but in Altria Group the state law was
aimed at deceptive advertising, not the health effects of smoking. Unless
Congress has demonstrated “a clear and manifest purpose” to preempt
state law, the state’s police power remains intact.
Federal law can preempt state law even in the absence of an actual
conflict where Congress has occupied the field subject to regulation. This
is a matter of interpretation of how far Congress originally intended
to go. Where the issues are of national interest or require national
uniformity—as with the regulation of Indian tribal affairs, immigration,
or the migration of birds throughout the country—the Court is likely to
read federal statutes as preempting the field.
Perhaps the fuzziest area of preemption doctrine concerns cases within
the powers of Congress in areas within which Congress has not yet
legislated. Does the dormant power not yet exercised prevent the states
from acting in the meantime? Early advocates of a strong national government argued that the ability of states to legislate on matters having
effects beyond their borders was a major weakness of the government
under the Articles of Confederation, which the commerce clause and
supremacy clause were intended to cure. Accordingly, states could not
act within areas covered by the federal commerce power, although they
Constitutional Law
45
might legislate in other areas that would have some incidental effect on
commerce. Others took a narrow view of the federal power, arguing that
state legislation was preempted only where it actually conflicted with
federal enactments.
The resolution of this issue began in the 1850s and was definitively
formulated in a series of cases from the New Deal forward. The test
is sensitive to concerns of federalism. States ought to be permitted to
legislate in response to local needs, but they should not be permitted to
interfere with the flow of commerce among the states. The Court balances the state’s local interests in enforcing its legislation against the
burden and discrimination imposed by it on interstate commerce. Thus
a state may protect its interest in safe highways by enacting maximum
height and weight limits for trucks on its roads, even if few trucks
can meet the limits, because the ban was imposed equally on trucks
used within the state and going through the state (for example, South
Carolina State Highway Dept. v. Barnwell Bros., 1938), but it may not
ban extra-long tractor-trailers where the terms of the ban exempted
many in-state truckers (as in Kassel v.  Consolidated Freightways
Corp., 1981).
One other aspect of the constitutional allocation of authority between the national government and the states deserves mention. The
states have independent constitutional status and general police power,
while the federal government has only enumerated powers, so there are
things the federal government cannot direct the states to do. The federal government could not, for example, tell a state where to locate its
capital, as it tried to do when Oklahoma was admitted to the Union
(Coyle v. Smith, 1911). But as the federal government and the federal
budget have grown, Congress has devised a mechanism for getting the
states to do what it wants without directly commanding them. Congress
establishes federal spending programs administered through the states
but conditions a state’s participation on its compliance with specified
conditions. For example, the Twenty-first Amendment ended prohibition and gave the states near-total authority over the sale of alcoholic
beverages. Because of the states’ authority, arguably the amendment
bars Congress from enacting a national minimum drinking age. In 1988,
however, Congress enacted a statute that withheld a portion of federal
highway funds from a state unless the state had a minimum drinking age
of twenty-one. As a practical matter, this was equivalent to a national
requirement because every state depended on federal funds to build and
maintain its roads. Could Congress do indirectly what it could not constitutionally do directly? Yes, Chief Justice William Rehnquist said for
a majority of the Court, because controlling highway funds was within
Law 101
46
the Congress’s spending power and the drinking age was related to safe
travel on interstate highways (South Dakota v. Dole, 1987).
As with Congress’s commerce clause power, NFIB v. Sebelius (2013)
drew limits on this use of congressional action in relation to the states—
the first time the Court had held a Congressional spending condition
unconstitutional. The ACA extended the Medicaid system for providing health care to low-income Americans by requiring states to cover
residents within 133 percent of the poverty line; the federal government
would pay 100 percent of these costs until 2016 and would decrease
its payments to 90  percent thereafter. Chief Justice Roberts’ opinion
concluded that this measure crossed the line from encouraging the states
to participate in Medicaid to coercing them to do so. He characterized
the threat of cutting off all Medicaid funds for failing to comply with the
new program as “a gun to the head” of the states, because Medicaid was
so well entrenched and constituted such a large portion of the budget of
the states that they could not bear to lose the funds.
3
First Freedoms
Constitutional Rights
The basic issue of constitutional law is how to create a government
strong enough to do what we want it to and yet limit the power of that
government so that it can’t do what we don’t want. One of the main
things we don’t want the government to do is to invade our “rights.”
What is meant by “rights” changes over time, of course, but we have become used to the idea that there are certain things the government can’t
do to us.
For the first century and a half of our constitutional history, the primary concern of constitutional law was with the issues of government
structure discussed in the last chapter:  what powers the Constitution
gives to the federal courts, Congress, and the president and how the federal powers limit the authority of state governments. Since the middle of
the twentieth century, more of the action in constitutional law has been
concerned with defining individual rights, and it is to that area that we
now turn.
What Rights Does Constitutional Law Protect?
Every constitutional right is grounded in one or more provisions of the
text of the Constitution. One way of learning about these rights is to
refer to the provisions one by one—the First Amendment guarantee of
free speech, the Second Amendment right to bear arms, and so on—and
consider the rights that emanate from them. But it is easier to understand
the rights if we separate them into two groups.
The first group of rights is process rights. These rights are about the
procedures the government must follow—how the government must behave when it acts with respect to an individual or, sometimes, a group.
The second group of rights is substantive rights. These rights define
the areas of individual freedom that the government cannot invade
Law 101
48
regardless of the procedures it follows. Although the line between process rights and substantive rights isn’t a particularly sharp one, the distinction is helpful.
A couple of examples suggest the difference between process and substantive rights. If you are receiving Social Security benefits, the government can’t just take them away because some bureaucrat believes you
are no longer entitled to them. Before your benefits can be cut off, your
constitutional right to due process guarantees that you must receive notice of the government’s claim and must have the opportunity to present
your arguments about the issue at a hearing. This is a process right.
On the other hand, if the government wants to force you to attend a
Catholic Mass, the constitutional issue is one of substance, not process.
Even if the government gives you notice and a hearing, it cannot infringe
on your substantive constitutional right to choose your own religion.
Process rights include the right to “due process of law,” found in the
Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments, and the right to “equal protection of
the laws,” from the Fourteenth Amendment. Due process means that the
government must follow fair procedures in taking action with respect to
an individual. The difficult question is figuring out what process is due
in a particular case. If someone is charged with a crime for which he or
she could be executed, the matter is obviously more serious than the
threatened termination of Social Security benefits, so the Constitution
in that instance would impose more procedural requirements. Often,
though, determining when someone is entitled to due process and what
procedures are required is a more complex issue.
The constitutional law of equal protection has expanded greatly since
the middle of the twentieth century, first as a result of the civil rights
movement and then because of claims for equal treatment from members
of groups other than racial minorities, such as women, ethnic groups,
and LGBT people. Equal protection requires that the government treat
similarly situated people the same; for example, as the Supreme Court
held in Brown v. Board of Education, a state can’t treat black children
unequally by sending them to separate schools from white children. That
seems obvious to us now, but most equal protection claims are more
controversial. Who is entitled to equal protection: Latinos? Transgender
people? Physically challenged people? And what does it mean to treat
different people and different groups equally?
Substantive rights are more varied than process rights, but at a very
general level, they can be described as serving one or two purposes.
One purpose is allowing people to participate fully in the affairs of society, including the political process. For example, freedom of speech
and freedom of the press contribute to open political discourse and
Constitutional Rights
49
democratic government. The other purpose is allowing people to protect
their well-being and personal integrity and to develop and express their
individuality. Freedom of speech also permits personal expression, for
example, and the right to choose and practice one’s own religion furthers
personal growth.
One other note about constitutional rights in general before turning
to the details of particular rights:  The Bill of Rights—the first ten
amendments—was added to the Constitution shortly after its adoption as a means of further protecting individuals against the threat of
the newly powerful federal government. By its terms and under the
common understanding of the time, the Bill of Rights protected people
only against actions of the federal government, not the states. After the
Civil War the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments were
added to the Constitution; these abolished slavery, ensured voting rights,
guaranteed equal protection, and extended due process requirements to
the states. Although the amendments did not themselves explain the relationship between their provisions and the freedoms expressed in the Bill
of Rights, eventually the Supreme Court adopted an approach known
as selective incorporation. The Fourteenth Amendment does not apply
all of the Bill of Rights protections to the states wholesale; instead, the
Court examines each provision and selectively incorporates the most important ones into the Fourteenth Amendment. The standard the Court
arrived at was to adopt “principle[s] of justice so rooted in the tradition
and conscience of our people as to be ranked as fundamental . . . [and]
implicit in the concept of ordered liberty.” Applying this standard, the
Court eventually brought nearly all of the provisions of the Bill of Rights
into the Fourteenth Amendment and so rendered them binding on the
states.
What Is Due Process?
The Fifth Amendment, which applies to the federal government, states
that “No person shall . . . be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without
due process of law.” The Fourteenth Amendment adds “nor shall any
State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process
of law.” Most of the key terms in these two clauses—“liberty,” “property,” and “due process”—are vague. A knowledge of history, culture,
and judicial authority, and extensive debate about the values of our society, are needed to get us close to a meaning. But by reading the text
itself we can begin to understand the due process clauses.
The due process clauses suggest that all persons have rights to something known as “life, liberty, or property.” The government cannot take
Law 101
50
away any of those rights unless it observes “due process of law.” This
concept contains both a prohibition on government action and by implication an authorization of government action. The clauses explicitly, if
vaguely, state what the government cannot do—deprive someone of life,
liberty, or property without due process. They also imply what the government can do—deprive someone of life, liberty, or property if it does
so with due process.
This is obvious but important. We know that the government can
deprive someone of life, liberty, and property. A state can imprison a
criminal, confiscate his gun and his getaway car, and even execute him.
The government has tremendous power—even over the life and death
of its people. But the power is limited by the due process clauses. Before
it imprisons someone, for example, the government must allow a fair
trial, a right of appeal, and an attorney for the accused if he needs one.
Due process is designed to ensure that government policies and rules of
law are carried out fairly and consistently. (Due process requirements in
criminal proceedings are discussed in Chapter 9.)
As our initial reading of the clauses indicates, there are two issues
that arise when a right of due process is asserted. First, is the interest
asserted a right to life, liberty, or property that is within the protection
of the Fifth or Fourteenth Amendment? Second, if the right is worthy of
protection, how much protection does it get—that is, how much process
is due?
While life has not figured much in interpretations of the due process
clauses, liberty and property have to a much greater degree. The right to
life arises most often in death penalty cases. It also figures by implication
in abortion cases. In Roe v. Wade, for example, the Supreme Court held
that a fetus is not a person within the meaning of the due process clauses
because as used in the Constitution the term “person” does not refer to
a fetus. Thus a fetus does not have due process rights.
Liberty in the constitutional sense obviously includes physical
freedom, so it limits the ability of the government to imprison people for
crimes. Liberty also includes physical restraints besides incarceration in
prison. When the state seeks to have a child removed from the custody
of its parents and declared a ward of the state or to commit a mentally
ill person to a psychiatric institution, it is attempting to restrain their liberty, and the due process clauses require that it observe fair procedures
in doing so.
Constitutional liberty also includes the freedom to engage in activities
besides physical movement. The Supreme Court has said that liberty,
for due process purposes, denotes “not merely freedom from bodily restraint but also the right of the individual to contract, to engage in any of
Constitutional Rights
51
the common occupations of life, to acquire useful knowledge, to marry,
establish a home and bring up children, to worship God according to the
dictates of his own conscience, and generally to enjoy those privileges
long recognized . . . as essential to the orderly pursuit of happiness by free
men” (in Board of Regents v. Roth, 1972, quoting Meyer v. Nebraska,
1923). Thus if a state wishes to take a child away from its parents, the
child has a liberty interest because he or she will be placed in foster care
or a state home, and the parents also have a liberty interest, the interest
in the autonomy of their family.
Property obviously includes tangible property. The government cannot
use or seize your property without a fair procedure. Property rights also
are protected by the Fifth Amendment’s mandate that the government
may not take property without just compensation. In the exercise of
its power of eminent domain, the government can condemn your property and take it for a public purpose, such as when building a highway
through your land, but it must provide a hearing and it must pay for the
land. (Eminent domain is discussed in Chapter 7.)
Property ordinarily means things that are important to own, including
intangible property. Does a state employee have a property interest in
her job, for example, or a recipient of Social Security disability payments
a property interest in his benefits, that give rise to due process rights?
In the 1960s and 1970s it became more apparent that many of the
most important things in society no longer took a physical form but
were intangible interests created by the government: licenses, entitlement
programs, public contracts, government jobs, and so on. In a 1970 case,
Goldberg v. Kelly, the Supreme Court held that New York could not
terminate a welfare recipient’s benefits without first providing him an
evidentiary hearing. In other cases the Court held that a prisoner’s interest in being granted parole on specified conditions, a state college
professor’s interest in continued employment, and customers’ expectation of continued service by a public utility were all sufficient property
interests to trigger due process protections.
In a series of cases beginning in the mid-1970s, however, the Court
limited the expansive possibilities of this analysis. Due process is required only where someone has an entitlement, and an entitlement is
defined as something already possessed, as distinguished from an expectation of future benefit. Thus a prisoner does not have a due process
right in determining whether he is eligible for parole, although he may
have a due process right if the state attempts to revoke a parole already
granted. To decide whether something was an entitlement or an expectation, the Court would look to the state law that created the interest in
the first place. Therefore, a student has a right to a hearing before being
Law 101
52
suspended from school because under state law students are expected to
attend school, but a government employee may not have a due process
right to a hearing before being fired if the state law defines his right of
continued employment as a mere expectation.
Assuming that someone has a life, liberty, or property interest, the
second issue that arises in due process analysis is what process is due
before the government can infringe that interest. In the Anglo-American
tradition, the first thing lawyers think of in terms of due process is a trial.
The paradigm for giving someone due process is, therefore, something
that looks like a trial, including notice of the issues, a chance to present
evidence and arguments, the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses or
otherwise dispute the government’s evidence, the right to be represented
by an attorney, and an impartial decision maker who will give reasons
for her decision.
But should a trial-like proceeding be constitutionally required every
time the due process clauses are invoked? Are the due process values
equally important in a capital crime, the revocation of Social Security
benefits, or a suspension from school, so that in each case the person
affected is entitled to a full trial, a lawyer, and an appeal? There is also a
concern for efficiency; if the government had to provide a full trial every
time it affected a liberty or property interest, the system would grind to
a halt.
In Mathews v. Eldridge (1976), the Supreme Court defined a threefactor balancing test to determine how much procedure is required in
a given situation. First, what is the interest of the person who will be
affected by the government action? The stronger the interest, the more
process is required; a mentally ill person who may be involuntarily
committed to a mental institution for an indefinite period is entitled to
more procedure than a driver whose license is being suspended for three
months—who is, in turn, entitled to more procedure than a student who
is being suspended from school for three days. Second, how great is the
risk of making an erroneous decision, and how much would that risk
be reduced by expanding the procedures? In cases in which no facts are
left to be decided—the automatic suspension of a driver’s license after
a third conviction, for example—additional procedures would not be
of much help, but where many facts and legal issues are in dispute—
say, whether a driver was intoxicated—more procedures would reduce
the risk of error. Third, how important is the government’s interest in
taking the challenged action, including the administrative or financial
burden required to use more extensive procedures? Providing a full trial
for every change in Social Security benefits status would impose a huge
cost on the federal government.
Constitutional Rights
53
Consider how this test applies in the case of schools punishing their
students. Suppose the principal of a Columbus, Ohio, high school wants
to suspend a student for ten days for being involved in a lunchroom
fracas that damaged school property. Because Ohio has created a system
of compulsory and free public education, a constitutionally protected
property interest is involved, and therefore due process is required. But
how much process is due? Is the principal allowed to suspend the student simply on the report of a teacher who witnessed the events, does
the principal also have to get the student’s side of the story, or is the student entitled to a full hearing including being represented by a lawyer?
Does the procedure have to come before the student is suspended, or is
it enough that there is a review of the decision after it is made?
The Supreme Court addressed these issues in Goss v. Lopez (1975).
Because of the importance of attending school and the stigma attached to
suspension, the student has an important interest in not being suspended
without a good reason that has been fairly determined. Even principals
acting in good faith can make mistakes if they act after hearing only one
side of the story and without giving the student an opportunity to rebut
the charges or explain his conduct. It does not cause much delay or expense for the principal to call the student in and ask for an explanation
before meting out a suspension; requiring a full hearing, however, would
impose undue expense and burden on school administrators.
In some cases, however, even this much process is not due. If a teacher
wants to give a student detention for acting up in class, does she have to
provide him with an opportunity to be heard first? Of course not. And
sometimes more process is due. If the school wants to suspend the student for an entire school year, the student’s interest in attending school
and in preventing an erroneous decision is much greater, so a fuller process is required, perhaps even including a trial-type hearing with the opportunity to be represented by counsel and to present and cross-examine
witnesses.
Does Constitutional Law Require That Everyone Be Treated Equally?
No, it doesn’t. But it does guarantee everyone “equal protection of the
laws.” What’s the difference?
The Fourteenth Amendment, originally adopted during Reconstruction
to deal with the vestiges of slavery in the South, forbids a state to “deny
to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.”
(After the amendment’s adoption an equal protection principle applying
to the national government was read into the due process clause of the
Fifth Amendment.) The equal protection clause has been the source of
Law 101
54
a tremendous expansion of rights since the middle of the twentieth century. The civil rights movement and the other antidiscrimination battles
it spawned have been litigated primarily on the basis of the equal protection clause.
In three respects, the equal protection clause does not guarantee that
everyone be treated absolutely equally. First, like all other constitutional
provisions, the equal protection clause limits government discrimination
but not private discrimination. The Constitution prohibits a state from
discriminating against black people, but it has no power over the actions
of private individuals; a white supremacist group is not constitutionally
required to admit black members. However, the equal protection clause
does indirectly regulate private conduct. When a private person exercises
a right created or enforced by the government, the Court will view it as
if the state itself were acting. In Shelley v. Kraemer (1948), for example,
a landowner sued to enforce a restrictive covenant in his neighbor’s deed
that prohibited the sale of the neighbor’s home to a black person; the
homeowner was effectively prevented from engaging in the discriminatory behavior because any court decision enforcing the covenant would
constitute discriminatory “state action” in violation of the equal protection clause. Also, many actions of private individuals and businesses are
controlled by state and federal civil rights laws. To further the equality
principle of the Fourteenth Amendment, state legislatures and Congress
have enacted laws that prohibit discrimination on the basis of race,
gender, national origin, sexual orientation, or some other bases in hiring,
in providing access to public accommodations such as restaurants,
and so on.
Second, “equal protection of the laws” means that when the government passes a law, creates a program, or engages in an activity, it must
treat people equally under the relevant law. But the government does
not have to go out of its way to initiate programs that would correct
inequalities that people otherwise suffer. The government may not discriminate on the basis of race, for example, but it is not constitutionally
required to enact legislation to cure private discrimination (although
Congress has done so anyway).
Third, and most important, the government can “discriminate” by
putting people into groups and treating the groups differently if it has a
legitimate reason for doing so. If you retire at age sixty-six you collect
Social Security benefits, but if you retire at age forty-six you don’t. A state
university charges lower tuition to state residents than to out-of-staters.
The federal and state governments make these kinds of distinctions in
every activity they perform, treating people or groups differently. The
equal protection clause does not require that the government treat
Constitutional Rights
55
everybody the same, but it does require that the government treat everyone who is similarly situated the same. For equal protection purposes,
this means that the people or groups in question must be in about the
same position with respect to the relevant government policy.
Remember that the basic issue of constitutional law is giving the government enough power while setting limits on the exercise of that power.
The equal protection clause prescribes a particular kind of limit. We
want the government to be able to further the public interest, and that
requires it to use classifications that advantage some people and disadvantage others. But we don’t want those advantages and disadvantages
to be distributed on the basis of characteristics that do not advance the
public interest or that are morally repugnant.
The need for this kind of limit on government action is particularly
apparent where government policy discriminates against a minority
group. Under our system, the majority rules, but not too much; electoral majorities can impose their will on minorities, but not when it
has a particularly disadvantageous, disempowering, or stigmatizing
effect. Creating racially segregated schools, for example, didn’t advance
the purpose of providing a good public education for all children; it
undermined that purpose because of the tendency of the black schools
to receive inferior resources from the white majority and because of the
stigma attached to racial segregation. Segregated schools also offended
our notions of fairness and equality; geography, academic merit, or even
wealth can affect what kind of school a child attends, but race shouldn’t
have anything to do with it.
The picture is further complicated because the courts are the government institution authorized to enforce the equal protection clause. If the
courts are too aggressive in reviewing legislation on equal protection
grounds, they can become too powerful, by invading the province of the
legislature and making judgments about which classifications best serve
public needs. If they are too deferential to legislative judgments, they fail
in their constitutional duty to provide equal protection and they allow
the other branches to become too powerful.
The Supreme Court responds to these concerns by giving more deference to some legislative decisions and less to others, depending on who
or what is being discriminated against. (And, of course, depending on
the ideological orientations of the justices and the political atmosphere
at a given time.) Classifications that arise out of ordinary government
regulation of economic affairs are not particularly suspicious, as long as
the classification used seems reasonable in light of the government interest to be advanced. In those cases the Court will give only a cursory
review by looking for a rational relationship between the classification
Law 101
56
and the government interest and probably will uphold the program. On
the other hand, some classifications have been regarded as especially
suspicious—those that discriminate on the basis of race, national origin,
or some other suspect class, for example, or that burden the exercise of
a constitutionally fundamental right such as free speech. In those cases
the Court will take an especially hard look at the legislative distinction
(called strict scrutiny) and probably invalidate it. If the case lies somewhere in between, so will the Court’s review, called, appropriately, intermediate review.
The rational relationship test is applied to most ordinary economic or
regulatory legislation. One of the functions of government is to regulate
all sorts of economic affairs, from controlling advertising to providing
retirement benefits. In making these regulations, the legislature (and the
executive branch in carrying out legislation) must make classifications
between groups (such as drawing a line at age sixty-six for retirement
benefits). If the courts were to second-guess the legislative or executive
judgments in each of those cases, the judicial branch would in effect become the most powerful branch of the government. Instead, the Supreme
Court has concluded that in reviewing ordinary legislation like this under
the equal protection clause, its task is limited to asking two questions: Is
the legislation directed at a legitimate government objective? Is it rationally related to achieving that objective? If the answer to both questions
is “yes,” the legislation complies with the equal protection clause.
As a practical matter, when the Court applies the rational relationship
test it usually upholds the challenged government action. In the Court’s
view, the legislature is entitled to tremendous deference to decide what
classifications are appropriate in enacting ordinary legislation of this sort.
Accordingly, the Court typically accepts or even infers a legitimate end
for legislation and requires only the most minimal connection between
the end and the classification used. The few exceptions involve cases
in which the classification demonstrates “animosity toward the class of
persons affected,” as the Court said in Romer v. Evans (1996). In that
case, for example, the Court invalidated an amendment to the Colorado
constitution prohibiting state or local governments from enacting laws
to protect against discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, because the amendment “classifies homosexuals not to further a proper
legislative end but to make them unequal to everyone else. . . . A State
cannot so deem a class of persons a stranger to its laws.”
The opposite of the rational relationship test is strict scrutiny. The
equality principle of the Fourteenth Amendment has two core areas
of application: When government action is directed against a suspect
class, such as African Americans whom the amendment originally was
Constitutional Rights
57
intended to protect, or when government action invades a fundamental
right in a discriminatory manner, the Court will engage in strict scrutiny
in reviewing the action’s compliance with the equal protection clause.
Instead of deferring to the other branches of government, the Court will
determine for itself whether the classification is necessary to promote a
compelling governmental objective. Most of the time, when the Court
uses strict scrutiny the challenged government action is held invalid.
The suspect classifications with the longest history are, of course,
race and similar categories such as national origin. When a government
action distinguishes people on the basis of their race, the action is inherently suspect in light of the nation’s history of slavery and racism.
Accordingly, the Court will closely examine the action to see if the
racial classification is really necessary to achieve a compelling government objective and will almost always invalidate such a classification. Indeed, only in the notorious Japanese internment cases did
the Supreme Court uphold an explicit discrimination against minority
races, where it permitted the government to remove Japanese Americans
from the Pacific Coast states during World War II and imprison them
in internment camps. (In the 1980s, decades after the war had ended,
the Japanese Americans who had been convicted of violating the internment orders had their convictions vacated, and Congress issued an
official apology for the action.)
Strict scrutiny also is applied when a government classification
discriminates against a constitutionally fundamental interest. Some fundamental interests are expressed in the Constitution itself, such as the
right to free speech; others have been found by the Court to be implicit
in the constitutional scheme, such as the right to travel from state to
state. When a government classification burdens some people in the exercise of a fundamental interest, the Court will strictly scrutinize the
classification to determine if it is necessary to achieve a compelling government interest. If it is not—and in most cases it is not—the classification is held to violate the equal protection clause. For example, the
Court has invalidated, as undue burdens on the right to travel, one-year
residency requirements for voting (Dunn v. Blumstein, 1972) and for receiving welfare benefits (Shapiro v. Thompson, 1969).
Finally, there are classifications that are not as invidious as suspect
classifications but are at least questionable, and there are interests that do
not have the constitutional status of fundamental interests but are nonetheless important. These intermediate classifications and interests provoke, naturally enough, an intermediate level of review. Here the Court
does not examine the relationship between the government interest and
the challenged classification as closely as it does with a suspect class or
Law 101
58
fundamental interest, nor is it as deferential as with ordinary economic
regulation. Classifications based on gender are the prime example of an
intermediate class; in the Court’s view, sex discrimination does not bear
the opprobrium or the history of oppression of racial discrimination,
but it is sufficiently questionable that it demands closer examination
than ordinary legislative classifications. Because sex discrimination falls
in this intermediate category, the decisions are much less predictable. For
example, the Court struck down a Utah law that provided that women
reached the age of majority at eighteen but men at twenty-one, so that
parents had to support their sons longer than their daughters, on the
basis that the longer period was designed for males to receive an education so they could better support a family (Stanton v. Stanton, 1975).
However, it upheld a California statute that made it statutory rape for a
male to have sexual intercourse with a minor female, even though there
was no corresponding prohibition of a female to have intercourse with a
minor male, because of the state’s interest in preventing the unique harm
to women that follows from illegitimate pregnancies (Michael M.  v.
Superior Court, 1981).
This three-tiered scheme of equal protection analysis provides an orderly start to the concept, but tough issues remain. Consider one of the
most important recent issues under equal protection doctrine: “affirmative action,” as it is called by its proponents, or “reverse discrimination,” as it is called by opponents. The issues are simple to state but
difficult to solve: Does the equality principle embodied in the Fourteenth
Amendment demand formal equality, so that the government may never
use racial distinctions? Or does it permit the government to consider
history and context to make racial distinctions to correct racial inequality? The equal protection clause originally was adopted to protect
minority interests. Proponents of affirmative action argue that taking
remedial measures to benefit minorities who traditionally have been
discriminated against and have been less powerful politically is consistent with the clause’s original purpose and, in fact, is necessary to
erase the effects of discrimination. Moreover, affirmative action that, for
example, increases diversity in schools benefits everyone by providing
role models for minority students and enriching the educational environment for all students. Opponents of affirmative action argue that
the proper application of the equal protection clause is to prohibit all
forms of discrimination using suspect classes such as race and gender,
whether they advantage or disadvantage a particular group. Affirmative
action that favors members of minority groups unfairly burdens others
who have not contributed to discrimination and themselves become the
objects of unfair discrimination.
Constitutional Rights
59
As usual, we can begin with some relatively easy cases. In the school
desegregation cases, school districts were found to have deliberately
discriminated among students on the basis of race. To remedy the effects
of segregated schools, it may be necessary to take race-conscious actions,
by assigning teachers and students to schools on the basis of their race.
This kind of affirmative action is remedial; the only way to remedy
proven, intentional discrimination is to use race as a category.
Suppose, however, that the government voluntarily undertakes affirmative action without a proven history of discrimination. Here shifting
majorities on the Court and the varied contexts from which the cases arise
have produced a variety of approaches. In 1990, for example, a 5–4 majority of the justices held that the Federal Communications Commission
policy favoring minority owners of radio or television stations was
constitutional (Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v.  Federal Communications
Commission), but in 1995, Justice Thomas, who was appointed in 1991,
joined the four Metro Broadcasting dissenters to hold that the federal government’s policy of favoring minority contractors on highway
projects was not (Adarand Contractors, Inc. v. Pena).
An area in which affirmative action has been hotly contested is higher
education. In Regents of the University of California v. Bakke (1978) the
justices issued six separate opinions, with no single opinion commanding
a majority of the Court; Justice Powell cast the deciding vote and his
opinion became regarded as controlling, even though no other justice
entirely agreed with his reasoning. He concluded that a public university
could not set aside seats in its class especially for members of a minority
group, it could consider the race of applicants in making individualized
admissions decisions, and an affirmative action program that did so
would be subject to strict scrutiny.
In the decades following Bakke, universities used a variety of affirmative action programs. In 2003 the Court revisited the issue in a pair of
cases involving admissions to the University of Michigan’s law school
and undergraduate college. In Grutter v. Bollinger the Court upheld the
constitutionality of the law school’s affirmative action program, and in
the companion case of Gratz v. Bollinger it struck down the college’s
program. The Court repeated that racial classifications are subject to
strict scrutiny requiring that they be “narrowly tailored to further compelling government interests.” The university’s compelling interest was
the same in each case, “to obtain the educational benefits that flow from
a diverse student body,” an interest that the Court acknowledged to
be valid. In furthering this compelling interest, the law school engaged
in a wide-ranging, individualized review of every applicant’s potential
contribution to the diversity of the law school community, considering
Law 101
60
factors such as extensive community service and experience in business
or other fields as well as race. The college, on the other hand, used a
point system for admissions under which minority applicants automatically received one-fifth of the points necessary for admission, which had
the practical effect of guaranteeing admissions for minimally qualified
minority applicants. Different majorities of the Court found that the law
school program was narrowly tailored to meet its goal, consistent with
the requirements of Bakke and therefore constitutional, but the college
program was not.
After Grutter and Gratz, the University of Texas responded to the
problem of an insufficiently diverse student body by adopting an
admissions plan under which 75 percent of the entering class was taken
from the top 10 percent of Texas high schools and 25 percent was taken
according to an admissions index that used diversity as one factor.
Abigail Fisher, a white student, was rejected under this plan and sued,
claiming that the use of race as a factor was impermissible.
In Fisher v. University of Texas (2013, 2015), Justice Kennedy, writing
for the Court, reaffirmed that colleges have a compelling interest in a
diverse student body. Because racial classifications were subject to strict
scrutiny, however, the university needed to show that the use of race was
necessary to achieve diversity. After reviewing the steps the university
took to define and achieve its goal of diversity, the Court concluded that
its plan was narrowly tailored and there were no available and workable
alternatives to achieve that goal.
How Does the Constitution Protect Freedom of Speech?
The Bill of Rights was adopted to make clear that the new national government lacked the power to infringe the rights of the people. Included
in the First Amendment to the Constitution was what may be the most
fundamental of those rights: “Congress shall make no law . . . abridging
the freedom of speech, or of the press.” Freedom of speech acts as the
guarantor of the other rights, permitting open political debate and
challenges to government authority.
The free speech clause was little used for more than a hundred years,
until government repression at the time of World War I sparked the first
flurry of free speech cases. Since then the Supreme Court has developed
a body of First Amendment jurisprudence that significantly protects
speech. Often in times of stress—the era of McCarthyism in the 1950s
is a prime example—that protection has waned, but protection of free
speech in the United States is still broader than in any other country.
Constitutional Rights
61
Judges and scholars have developed several theories of free speech
to explain and guide the legal developments. The theories are important: Why we protect free speech may determine what we protect and
how we protect it. The classic view is that freedom of speech permits a
“marketplace of ideas” in which different versions of truth and good
contend for the greater number of supporters. This view received its foremost expression in Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.’s dissent in Abrams
v.  United States (1919), a prosecution of anarchists for publishing
leaflets calling on the “workers of the world” to strike in opposition to
the United States’ intervention against the Bolsheviks during the Russian
Revolution. A majority of the Supreme Court affirmed the convictions
of the leafletters (who were sentenced to up to twenty years in prison),
but Holmes, joined by Justice Louis Brandeis, dissented, arguing “that
the ultimate good desired is better reached by free trade in ideas—that
the best test of truth is the power of the thought to get itself accepted in
the competition of the market.”
The most important “marketplace” in which ideas are contested is the
political realm. In a democracy, free debate about public issues, government policy, and candidates for office is essential to self-governance because it informs citizens, inculcates public values, and provides a forum
for criticism of the government. Protection of political speech is, therefore, at the core of the First Amendment, even if it does not define its
entire scope.
The marketplace of ideas approach may be too limited because it
attends only to the instrumental effects of free speech in reaching better
political decisions. Therefore, another theory argues that freedom of
speech has an independent value in affirming the dignity and promoting
the development of individuals. Protecting the speech of every person
demonstrates that every person’s voice potentially is valued in society
and allows everyone to learn and grow through participating in public
discourse.
Whether we follow one theory or the other, or some combination of the two, we face a difficult task in defining the content of
the First Amendment’s free speech guarantee. “Speech” takes many
forms:  expressing a political opinion, using a racial epithet, shouting
“Fire!” in a crowded theater, publishing a scurrilous story about a movie
star in a supermarket tabloid, or making false promises in an advertisement, to name only a few. Speech, for First Amendment purposes, also
has come to include some nonverbal expression: burning an American
flag, picketing, contributing to a political campaign, or making an obscene gesture. Which of these forms of “speech” are protected by the
Law 101
62
First Amendment from government intrusion, and how far does the protection extend?
The First Amendment protects speech, and speech has to be carried on
by a speaker. Who counts as a speaker for First Amendment purposes?
Ordinarily this is an easy question. Someone orating from a soapbox,
carrying a picket sign, or publishing a web page is surely a speaker.
But what if that someone is not a real person but is a corporation?
Corporations, labor unions, and similar associations long have been
subject to special restrictions on their communicative activities. In the
controversial case of Citizens United v.  Federal Election Commission
(2010), the Court broadly extended First Amendment protection to corporate expenditures.
In 2008 Citizens United, a nonprofit corporation, produced a film
critical of Hillary Clinton, then a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination, and also produced television ads promoting the
film. Federal election laws limited the ability of corporations to spend
funds for “electioneering communications” like these within thirty
days of a primary election. The Court held that “The First Amendment
protects more than just the individual on a soapbox and the lonely pamphleteer,” as Chief Justice Roberts said in concurrence; it also protects
corporations, including modest nonprofits, mom-and-pop businesses,
and ExxonMobil. The government argued that corporate expenditures
may have outsize influence and may lead to the corruption of public
officials or at least the appearance of corruption, but the Court dismissed
those concerns, noting that all speakers derive their financial resources
from the economic marketplace and are entitled to participate in the
marketplace of ideas.
Oddly enough, the government itself is not a speaker for First
Amendment purposes, so expressive actions by the government are not
subject to free speech restrictions. Citizens’ speech contests in the marketplace of ideas, where persuasive ideas and opinions will triumph over
unpersuasive ones. There is a different check on government speech,
however—the political and electoral processes themselves. Therefore, a
city could display monuments in a public park honoring the victims of
September 11, commemorating a historic granary, and commemorating
the city’s first fire station, among others, while refusing to permit the
erection of a religious organization’s monument setting forth the group’s
tenets of faith; the city as speaker could choose what it wished to express and not express (Pleasant Grove City v. Summum, 2009). Even
what seems like personal expression authorized by the state is government speech; the Texas motor vehicles department could refuse an application from the Sons of Confederate Veterans for a specialty license
Constitutional Rights
63
plate displaying a Confederate battle flag while approving plates that
featured the slogan and logo of Rotary International and plates with the
slogan “Get It Sold with RE/MAX” (Walker v. Texas Division, Sons of
Confederate Veterans, 2015).
One of the most important principles of constitutional law was established, bizarrely enough, in a footnote of a Supreme Court opinion. Chief
Justice Harlan Stone’s opinion in United States v. Carolene Products Co.
(1938) included the now legendary footnote 4, asserting a special constitutional status for certain rights, including freedom of speech. Footnote
4 stated that the presumption of constitutionality that the Court ordinarily gives to legislation may have a narrower scope “when legislation
appears on its face to be within a specific prohibition of the Constitution
such as those of the first ten amendments.” Constitutional rights within
the Bill of Rights, therefore, were given a “preferred position” over other
rights. This preferred position is to be effectuated through “more exacting judicial scrutiny” of government attempts to control speech, and
that is exactly what has occurred in the area of protected speech.
The preferred position of free speech restricts the power of state
and federal governments to prohibit or limit constitutionally protected
speech in a number of ways. First, the government generally may not
impose prior restraints on speech; that is, it may not prohibit speech in
advance, even where it constitutionally could punish the speaker after
the fact. Second, it may not limit speech based on its content. Third, the
government may limit the time, place, and manner of speech but only in
cases in which it has a compelling interest in doing so, adopts the least
restrictive means of limiting the speech, and does so by a regulation that
is neither too vague nor overly broad.
The prohibition on prior restraints of speech may be the strongest limitation in the First Amendment. Suppose during a time of war a former
government employee intends to interfere with the conduct of the war
by revealing information that is critical of government policy (as Daniel
Ellsberg, a former national security employee, did during the Vietnam
War in the Pentagon Papers case). If the information might undermine
support for the war and conceivably even help the enemy, the government may want to obtain an injunction to prevent the harm before it
occurs. Moreover, an injunction requires only an expedited hearing in
front of a judge, and if the employee violates the injunction, he can be
punished for contempt. The injunction, therefore, is a better remedy for
the government than would be a criminal punishment for revealing the
information.
But the free speech clause was designed to deny the government what
is best for it. The earliest understanding of free speech in English and
Law 101
64
American law was a prohibition on prior restraints. The government
could punish a person for saying or printing something that was seditious, blasphemous, or otherwise prohibited, but it could not censor
the statement or prohibit in advance its publication. That principle has
been carried over into modern First Amendment jurisprudence under
the doctrine prohibiting prior restraints. Government generally cannot
keep speech out of the marketplace of ideas, even when it can punish the
speech subsequently. The singular exception, which the Court recognized
in the Pentagon Papers case, is the disclosure of something like troop
movements in time of war or other speech that “must inevitably, directly,
and immediately” present a similar peril.
The Supreme Court has allowed prior restraints in two areas, however:  obscenity and commercial advertising. The Court has not been
clear on the distinction here, but it may be based on the smaller significance of delay in publication and the lower status of the speech in these
areas. Imposing a prior restraint on a matter of political debate could
keep an important opinion or fact out of the marketplace of ideas at a
crucial moment, but there usually is less time pressure on the distribution of obscene materials or on advertising.
The second kind of protection for speech is a prohibition on government regulation of the content of speech. Except in the most unusual
circumstances, government regulation of speech must be content-neutral.
That is, the government may not favor or disfavor the expression of
one point of view over another. As Justice Thurgood Marshall wrote,
“But, above all else, the First Amendment means that government has no
power to restrict expression because of its message, its ideas, its subject
matter, or its content.”
Consider in this context the highly controversial issue of flag burning.
While protesting the policies of the Reagan administration during the
1984 Republican National Convention, Gregory Lee Johnson unfurled
an American flag, doused it with kerosene, and set it on fire. While the
flag burned, Johnson and other protesters chanted, “America, the red,
white, and blue, we spit on you.” Johnson was convicted under a Texas
statute that prohibited the intentional desecration of the flag and was
sentenced to one year in prison and a $2,000 fine.
Johnson ignited not only a flag but a storm of national controversy.
His appeal (Texas v. Johnson) came to the Supreme Court in 1989. By a
five-to-four majority, the Court invalidated Johnson’s conviction because
the statute was a content regulation in violation of the First Amendment.
As the attorneys for the state admitted, Johnson’s conduct was meant
to be expressive—to communicate an idea—and he was prosecuted for
doing so. The state argued, however, that it had an interest in preventing
Constitutional Rights
65
breaches of the peace that might occur because people would be upset by
the flag burning and in “preserving the flag as a symbol of nationhood
and national unity.” The first argument failed because there was no evidence that the flag burning was likely to produce imminent lawlessness;
even if that might have been the result, prosecution of Johnson for the
probable violence might create an unconstitutional “heckler’s veto,” in
which the anticipated reaction to constitutionally protected speech can
be used as a basis for suppressing the speech. The second argument failed
because it was a direct regulation of content. As the majority wrote, “If
there is a bedrock principle underlying the First Amendment, it is that
the Government may not prohibit the expression of an idea simply because society finds the idea itself offensive or disagreeable. We have not
recognized an exception to this principle even where our flag has been
involved.”
The requirement that government regulation of speech be contentneutral even restricts its ability to control or punish speech that may be
offensive or false. The Asian American members of the rock band The
Slants had chosen the ethnic slur as their name to “reclaim” it and drain
it of its denigrating power. The federal Patent and Trademark Office
refused to register the band’s name as a trademark because it violated a
law against trademarks that disparaged or brought into disrepute people
or groups. The Supreme Court overturned the government’s decision,
remarking, “Speech that demeans on the basis of race, ethnicity, gender,
religion, age, disability, or any other similar ground is hateful; but the
proudest boast of our free speech jurisprudence is that we protect the
freedom to express the thought that we hate” (Matal v. Tam, 2017). In
another case Xavier Alvarez had lied about playing hockey for the Detroit
Red Wings and having married a Mexican starlet—“Lying was his habit,”
the Court said—but the lie that brought his case to the Supreme Court
was his public claim that he had received the Medal of Honor (United
States v. Alvarez, 2012). That lie was criminally punishable under the
Stolen Valor Act, and Alvarez was prosecuted. The government argued
that false speech was valueless, contributing nothing to the marketplace
of ideas and public debate. The Court refused to create an exception to
the principle of content neutrality for false speech. Certain kinds of false
speech can be prohibited or punished, such as speech that is defamatory
or that has adverse consequences, such as making false statements to
a public official. But content-based restrictions are presumed to be invalid because “our constitutional tradition stands against the idea that
we need Oceania’s Ministry of Truth,” as in George Orwell’s novel 1984.
While the government cannot regulate the content of speech, it can
regulate the time, place, and manner of speech and other expressive
Law 101
66
conduct. Does freedom of speech mean, for example, that someone is
free to expound their views over a loudspeaker at midnight in a residential neighborhood, or that a group can parade down the middle
of a street during rush hour to protest traffic policies? Certainly not.
The government can impose reasonable restrictions on the way speech is
communicated without censoring its content.
There is a problem, however. Time, place, and manner regulations
can act as a subterfuge for content regulation. If a municipal ordinance
requires that anyone wishing to use a loudspeaker get permission from
the chief of police, the chief’s exercise of discretion in deciding who to
permit to use a loudspeaker, as well as where and when, could be used
to discriminate against some types of content. To avoid this problem, the
Court has developed standards for time, place, and manner regulations
that follow from the preferred position given the right of free speech.
First, as the Court said in United States v. O’Brien (1968), “the incidental
restriction on alleged First Amendment freedoms [must be] no greater
than is essential to the furtherance of [the government’s] interest.” This
is often stated as the least restrictive alternative test. In regulating the
time, place, or manner of expression, the government must use the least
restrictive alternative means of serving its interest to avoid unnecessarily
limiting free speech. A city has an interest in preventing littering, but it
may not advance that interest by banning all distribution of handbills
and leaflets, when a less restrictive alternative would be to prosecute
people who actually throw papers on the streets.
Second, the regulation must not be overly broad. If the regulation is
drafted too broadly, it could prohibit protected speech or regulate content
to too great an extent. In Houston v. Hill (1987) the Court invalidated
an ordinance making it unlawful to “interrupt any policeman in the execution of his duty.” While the government could prevent interference
with police officers, it could not do so through a prohibition that also
would punish some protected speech.
Third, the regulation must not be overly vague. A vague statute does
not put people on notice as to what they can and cannot do, so they
might limit their First Amendment activities in fear of prosecution. And
a vague statute puts too much discretion in the hands of government
officials to license, limit, or prosecute under it, raising the possibility
that officials might exercise their discretion in a constitutionally impermissible manner.
Suppose someone blackmails you, threatening to reveal a dark secret
from your past unless you pay her off. Or suppose a publisher wants to
distribute a magazine filled with child pornography. Can he do so with
impunity and claim the protection of the First Amendment? Most people
Constitutional Rights
67
agree that some speech should receive full constitutional protection and
some should not. The problem is figuring out where to draw the lines.
To define fully protected, partially protected, and unprotected speech,
the Court begins with the theories of the First Amendment. From the
marketplace of ideas perspective, speech or communicative conduct has
value primarily because it is part of a public debate. Speech that does not
contribute to public debate does not deserve the same level of protection as speech that does contribute. Advocates of regulation argue that,
for example, pornographic pictures do not add anything to public discourse. Other kinds of speech simply cause harm without contributing
to debate, or the harm they cause vastly outweighs any contribution they
make. Threats by blackmailers pose a threat to the social order much
greater than any value the statements have. The same may be said from
the self-expression point of view; even though many forms of speech are
important means of self-expression, some (such as blackmail) are not,
and in others (child pornography) the harm of the speech outweighs the
value of permitting the expression.
One form of unprotected speech that is so obviously not entitled to
constitutional status that it rarely appears in the cases is speech that is
part of an act the law traditionally would consider criminal. When a
robber says “your money or your life” or a corporation issues a fraudulent prospectus in connection with a stock offering, the speech expresses
no opinion on a matter of public importance but is merely the functional
equivalent of the robber sticking his hand in your pocket and taking
your wallet.
Speech that is part of criminal conduct is an easy case. Other forms of
unprotected or less protected speech present more difficult definitional
and line-drawing problems. Commercial speech, speech that may give
rise to liability for defamation or other torts, obscenity, and incitement
to illegal activity receive some First Amendment protection but not as
much as other more traditionally protected forms of speech.
Commercial speech includes advertisements, use of trade names,
solicitations of clients by lawyers, posting of “For Sale” signs on houses,
distribution of general consumer information, and similar activities for
which there primarily is an economic motivation. The Supreme Court
first declared that commercial speech is entitled to First Amendment protection in 1976 when it struck down a Virginia statute that prohibited
pharmacists from advertising the prices of prescription drugs (Virginia
State Board of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, Inc.).
Speech is not disqualified from protection because the speaker’s interest
is economic; union members involved in a labor dispute have an economic interest, but their speech had long been protected. Individual
Law 101
68
consumers seek good products at low prices, and the public at large
benefits from well-informed decisions by consumers, so there is a strong
interest in the free dissemination of information and ideas in the commercial as well as the political realm.
That interest is strong enough to accord commercial speech First
Amendment protection but not as strong as the interest in other types
of speech. Some types of commercial speech can be prohibited altogether, including false and deceptive advertising. This category shows
how much less protection commercial speech gets. The Court upheld a
Texas statute that prohibited optometrists from practicing under trade
names; although there was no proof that optometrists had used trade
names to deceive consumers, the risk that they might was enough to
support the regulation. Nondeceptive commercial speech is entitled to
more protection, but because the government has a legitimate interest
in regulating some of that speech—to reduce excessive drinking through
the regulation of beer advertising, for example—how much is not always
clear. The Court has struck down a variety of restrictions on advertising
alcoholic beverages, upheld prohibitions on advertising lotteries and casino gambling, invalidated a ban on billboard advertising of tobacco
products, and split on state laws that limit the ways in which lawyers
and other professionals can solicit clients.
Defamation is a tort that imposes liability for making false and derogatory statements that injure someone’s reputation. Therefore, if someone
falsely states that a senator has been improperly influenced to support a
piece of legislation by donations from a corporation, or if a newspaper
publishes a false article to that effect, the senator may sue for damages
to her reputation. (For these purposes, First Amendment freedom of the
press is treated under the same standards as freedom of speech.) But
there is a problem here. The First Amendment encourages commentary
on public affairs, including criticism of the government and its officials.
If the law of defamation is too generous in providing a remedy to public
officials and others, citizens would be much more cautious in voicing
their criticisms, and the marketplace of ideas would be diminished.
Yet the interest in protecting one’s reputation is still valid. How do we
balance the two?
The Supreme Court addressed this dilemma in New York Times Co.
v. Sullivan (1964), a case arising out of the civil rights movement. The police commissioner of Montgomery, Alabama, sued the New York Times
over an advertisement alleging police brutality in Montgomery and
soliciting support for the civil rights movement. Although the advertisement was false only in a few minor respects, under Alabama law it was
defamatory and the Times, as publisher, was liable even though it had
Constitutional Rights
69
published the ad without knowledge of the misstatements. The Supreme
Court reversed the judgment, however. There is a “central meaning of
the First Amendment,” wrote Justice William Brennan for the Court,
that includes “a profound national commitment to the principle that debate on public issues should be uninhibited, robust, and wide-open, and
that it may well include vehement, caustic, and sometimes unpleasantly
sharp attacks on government and public officials.”
To protect this central meaning, the Court gave constitutional protection to some forms of speech that would constitute common law defamation. Otherwise, defamation actions could be used as a tool to chill the
expression of opinions. Advocates of unpopular views would be afraid
of being punished for getting the facts wrong, or that a jury unfavorable
to their view would decide against them, or simply of the cost of litigation and therefore would be reluctant to express their opinions—what
the Court referred to as “self-censorship.” A statement about a public
official is constitutionally protected unless the official could prove that it
was false and was made with “actual malice,” which the Court defined
as “knowledge that it was false or with reckless disregard of whether
it was false or not.” Under this standard, most public comment and all
good-faith journalistic judgments—including the publication of the advertisement by the Times—would be constitutionally privileged; only
defamation made with malice is constitutionally unprotected.
The same interest in public debate protects speech that otherwise
might give rise to liability for other torts. Members of the Westboro
Baptist Church picketed the funeral of Lance Corporal Matthew Snyder,
a Marine who had been killed in the line of duty in Iraq. The church
members believed that God hates the United States for tolerating homosexuality, particularly in the military, and they frequently picketed
military funerals and similar events with signs reading “Thank God
for Dead Soldiers,” “God Hates Fags,” and other repulsive sentiments.
Snyder’s father sued the church members for the tort of intentional infliction of emotional distress, claiming that their outrageous conduct
caused him extreme emotional harm and intruded on a private affair.
The Supreme Court recognized that the picketing was hurtful, but it was
done peacefully on a public street and involved “matters of public concern,” the protection of which “is at the heart of the First Amendment’s
protection.” Even speech that causes pain as in this case is protected
from tort liability “to ensure that we do not stifle public debate” (Snyder
v. Phelps, 2011).
Obscene speech (which includes writing, pictures, movies, and
live actions) is outside the scope of the First Amendment, so government action to restrict or prohibit obscenity is not subject to the same
Law 101
70
heightened scrutiny as protected forms of speech. The Supreme Court
most often has assumed that obscenity is unworthy of protection, rather
than justified the point. In a case involving the restriction of adult theaters,
however, it offered a few reasons: Because there may be some connection
between obscene material and crime, the state may regulate the former
in the hope of preventing the latter. Further, the presence of obscenity in
the community injures the community as a whole by polluting the public
environment and by intruding on unwilling recipients. In terms of the
theories supporting the protection of free speech generally, material that
is truly obscene contributes neither to public debate about significant
issues nor (in the middle-class sensibilities of the justices) to legitimate
personal growth or self-expression.
While the Court has long held the view that obscenity is unprotected,
it has had much more difficulty in drawing the line between unprotected
obscene speech and protected nonobscene speech. Hustler magazine
may be a mix of penetrating social satire and harmless entertainment
to one person but a disgusting appeal to animal lust to another. Perhaps
the most famous definition of any legal concept came from Justice Potter
Stewart, who said he could not define what it means to be obscene but “I
know it when I see it” (Jacobellis v. Ohio, 1964). But in addition to their
private predilections, the justices have formulated a series of tests to try
to determine what is obscene, and the substantial disagreement among
the justices shows how hard it can be to give specific meaning to general
constitutional propositions.
The most recent test articulated by the Court came in Miller
v. California (1973). The test for obscenity has three parts:
(a) whether the average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest; (b) whether the work depicts or describes, in
a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by the
applicable state law; and (c) whether the work, taken as a whole,
lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
The first part of the test distinguishes between a “shameful or morbid”
interest in sex (a prurient interest) and “normal, healthy sexual desires,”
as the Court said in a later case. This element essentially defines a
decision-making procedure. States have wide latitude to describe what
constitutes unprotected obscenity by defining “contemporary community standards” in a statute or ordinance and then leaving it up to a jury
to determine whether a particular book or adult movie, for example,
violates the standards. The state also can define the relevant community;
Constitutional Rights
71
there is no constitutional requirement that a national community be
used or even that any particular community be defined in advance
for the jury. So the producer of a film might be subjected to different
standards in, say, the laid-back, anything-goes community of Hollywood
and a straight-laced village in the Bible Belt. The community standards
test is particularly problematic for materials published on the Internet
that reach every community in America. In reviewing the Child Online
Protection Act’s attempt to prevent children from viewing obscene material on the Internet, only a plurality of justices upheld the statute’s use
of community standards; as Justice Breyer noted in his concurrence, by
using local community standards, “the most puritan of communities”
would be able to effectively prohibit the dissemination of material nationwide (Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union, 2002).
The second element is similarly vague, but the Court in Miller helpfully provided a few examples of patently offensive sexual conduct: “(a)
patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual
acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, (b)  patently offensive
representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory functions,
and lewd exhibitions of the genitals.” Of course, the examples are filled
with ambiguity:  Where is the line between a thoughtful and expressive description of masturbation, a description of masturbation fit for a
trashy novel, and a patently offensive description of masturbation?
Finally, the third element explicitly looks to the value of the work. If
a book has serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific merit, it is not
obscene. This judgment, unlike the first two, is not made with reference
to a local community’s standards. If, for example, a group of distinguished critics find a book to have literary value, it is not obscene under
the third element even if no one in a local community agrees.
One related type of unprotected speech is sexually explicit material
containing pictures of children that might not be obscene under Miller.
Because the state has an unusually strong interest in protecting children
from sexual exploitation, in New York v. Ferber (1982) the Court unanimously held that a state could criminalize the distribution of materials
containing sexual performances by children under the age of sixteen.
The prohibition on distribution accomplishes the state’s goal indirectly,
by creating a tremendous disincentive to use children in this way in
the first place. Virtual child pornography involving sexually explicit,
computer-generated images of children is protected, however, because
the connection between the images and harm to actual children is remote (Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, 2002).
Another form of unprotected speech is speech that incites violence. The
story begins with Holmes’s remark that “The most stringent protection
Law 101
72
of free speech would not protect a man in falsely shouting fire in a theater and causing a panic.” Words, in such a case, “have all the effect of
force.” The issue in any particular case is whether the words create “a
clear and present danger” of harm.
The metaphor of a crowded theater is powerful, but the issue has
arisen most often in cases in which a speaker advocates an act directed
against the government. First during World War I  and the Red Scare
of 1919–1920, then during the McCarthyism of the 1950s, and up to
the present governments have prosecuted their opponents for such potentially dangerous speech. Despite Holmes’s limitation of unprotected
speech to speech that carries a clear and present danger, the Supreme
Court was all too willing to exclude a variety of forms of political expression from the protection of the First Amendment.
During the First World War era, the government prosecuted persons who opposed the war effort, radicals sympathetic to the Russian
revolutionaries, and other political dissidents. The prevailing doctrine
was the “bad tendency” test, under which words that could be seen as
tending to produce a bad result were unprotected, even if in the context the bad result was extremely unlikely to come about. In Abrams
v. United States (1919), for example, Abrams and his cohorts scattered
leaflets on the streets of New York denouncing the U.S. role in opposition
to the Russian Revolution and calling for a general strike in response.
They were convicted under a wartime act that punished resistance to the
war effort, and despite the absurdity of the prospect that their leafleting
would lead to massive unrest, resistance, or interference with wartime
production, the Court upheld their conviction. Holmes dissented:
[W]e should be eternally vigilant against attempts to check the
expression of opinions that we loathe and believe to be fraught with
death, unless they so imminently threaten immediate interference
with the lawful and pressing purposes of the law that an immediate
check is required to save the country.
In the 1950s the Court employed a balancing version of the clear and
present danger test that weighed the gravity of the harm threatened
against the likelihood of its occurrence. In Dennis v. United States (1951)
defendants were convicted of conspiring to organize the Communist
Party of the United States, the goal of which was to overthrow the government by force. Because the harm threatened (violent overthrow) was
great, even though the defendants were improbably far from achieving
it, their speech was unprotected incitement under the First Amendment.
In Yates v. United States (1957), on the other hand, Communist Party
Constitutional Rights
73
officers were convicted only of advocating and teaching the need for the
violent overthrow of the government. Unlike in Dennis, their conduct
was directed at the teaching of doctrine, not the organizing of action, so
they could not constitutionally be convicted.
Finally, in 1969 in Brandenburg v. Ohio the Court rejected the bad
tendency and balancing approaches in favor of a standard that limited
unprotected speech to speech that imminently threatened unlawfulness.
The Court held that it would be unconstitutional “to forbid or proscribe
advocacy of the use of force or of law violation except where such advocacy is directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and
is likely to incite or produce such actions.” Racist speech made during
a rally of hooded, gun-toting Ku Klux Klan members was protected because it was not “preparing a group for violent action.” Advocacy of any
idea is protected speech, and advocacy of any action is protected unless
it was made with the intent to cause a violation of the law and it is very
likely to do so.
As during World War I, the Red Scare of the 1920s, and the
McCarthyism of the 1950s, the First Amendment has been under stress
because of the threat of terrorism since the attacks of September 11,
2001. The need to increase security against future attacks and the
prospect of a war on terrorism of indefinite duration against shadowy
enemies within and outside the United States pose new challenges for free
speech and other civil liberties. One sign of the maturation of our understanding of the importance of constitutional protections even in wartime
is that government overreaction has been limited, compared to earlier
eras. As legal scholar Geoffrey Stone pointed out, Eugene Debs, who
had received almost a million votes as the Socialist Party candidate for
president in 1912, was arrested, tried, and convicted during World War
I for obstructing army recruitment, but it was implausible to consider
an analogous prosecution of Democratic presidential candidate Howard
Dean in 2004 for opposing the Iraq War. After the July 7, 2005, subway
bombings in London, British prime minister Tony Blair proposed new
laws that would make “condoning, glorifying or justifying” terrorism
a crime and that would enable the government to shut down mosques
used “for fomenting terrorism.” No comparable measures were seriously
considered in the United States, and they would surely be unconstitutional under the Brandenburg test.
First Amendment protections are never entirely secure, however,
particularly in times of crisis. The Bush administration proposed
and Congress quickly enacted the USA PATRIOT Act to expand the
government’s investigative powers, the administration asserted new executive powers in wartime (discussed in Chapter 2), and, immediately
Law 101
74
after 9/11, it detained thousands of noncitizens without specific evidence
of their ties to the terrorists. The PATRIOT Act was followed by other
statutes that expanded the powers of the National Security Agency to
monitor communications in secret, and the Obama administration used
those powers aggressively. Yet the resilience of the civil liberties tradition
was demonstrated by the controversy these measures generated among
the public, in Congress, and in the courts. Professor Stone aptly quoted
Justice Louis Brandeis, who wrote in Whitney v. California (1927) “fear
breeds repression” but “courage is the secret to liberty.”
How Does the Constitution Protect Freedom of Religion?
Americans think of freedom of religion as one of our most important
liberties, and it is. The Constitution contains three provisions on religious liberty. Article VI provides that “no religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the United
States.” At the time of its drafting this was an extraordinary innovation;
it was common in England and throughout the colonies to require that
office holders swear their belief in a particular religion as a requirement
of public office. The First Amendment contains two clauses that speak
to different components of freedom of religion: “Congress shall make
no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free
exercise thereof. . . . ” The two religion clauses are referred to as the establishment clause and the free exercise clause. (As with the free speech
clause, although the religion clauses expressly limit the power of the
Congress they have been applied to all activities of government, federal
and state.)
At a basic level, the establishment clause and the free exercise clause
have been interpreted to protect religious liberty in different but complementary ways. The establishment clause prevents the government from
establishing a state religion or using the powers of the government to
support a particular religion, and the free exercise clause prohibits the
government from intruding on individual religious choices. By forbidding state support of religion, the establishment clause gives greater latitude to an individual’s exercise of religious choice, and by committing
religious belief and practice to the realm of individual choice, the free
exercise clause reduces the possibility that religion will become an area
of state power.
The Supreme Court noted the interaction of the establishment clause
and the free exercise clauses in Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical Lutheran
Church and School v.  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(2012). Cheryl Perich, a teacher at a church school, developed narcolepsy
Constitutional Rights
75
and took a disability leave. When she tried to return to work the school
told her that she had been replaced. When she threatened legal action
the school revoked her “call” to teach and terminated her. The Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission sued on her behalf, claiming retaliation in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act. The Court
recognized a “ministerial exception” to the Act, under which the government could not intervene in the hiring and firing of a church’s ministers, including “called” teachers at a religious school. Such intervention
would violate the establishment clause because it would involve the government in ecclesiastical decisions and would violate the free exercise
clause because it would limit a religious group’s right to shape its faith
through the appointment of its clergy.
Freedom of religion is so fundamental to our understanding of the
American way of life that it may be surprising that the Supreme Court
dealt with few religion cases until the middle of the twentieth century.
By then, of course, the role of government had vastly expanded; states as
well as the federal government regulated, intervened in, and financially
supported a host of activities that previously had been wholly committed
to the private sector. In doing so, the potential conflict between the establishment clause and the free exercise clause became apparent. If a
state provides special education services to students in a religious school,
isn’t it supporting an establishment of religion? But if it does not, is it
abridging the free exercise of religion by parents whose beliefs compel
them to send their children to religious school?
To resolve conflicts like this we might think of the religion clauses as
motivated by some guiding principles about the relationship between the
government and religion. As usual in complex areas of the law, the principles won’t necessarily be consistent or provide clear guides to deciding
all the cases, but they can get us started.
A first principle is that religion is a realm of voluntary choice. A person
can choose the faith she wishes to observe or can choose not to observe
any faith at all. The state may neither compel nor encumber that choice.
And support of religious institutions must be voluntary. Like the marketplace of ideas in the free speech area, there must be a marketplace of
faith and practice, in which religions flourish or wither depending on
their ability to attract supporters, free of state encumbrance or support.
A second principle is that religion and government are two separate
spheres. This principle is broader than the prohibition on the establishment of a state religion. The government should avoid involvement or
entanglement in religious affairs entirely. The strongest application of
this principle is that the state may not use tax dollars to fund religious
institutions or religious activities.
Law 101
76
A third principle is that the government should be neutral as to religion. It should not favor or disfavor one religion over another, nor
should it give preferences to religious activities over nonreligious activities, or vice versa.
All of these principles have circulated through the Supreme Court’s
attempts to interpret the religion clauses. The Court focuses separately
on the establishment and free exercise clauses, and the standards used to
evaluate government action under each clause have changed over time.
The establishment clause has an indisputable core meaning: The government may not establish an official religion. This seems like an obviously correct principle to us, but many other countries have official
religions, even liberal democracies such as the United Kingdom. A corollary to that principle is that government may not provide its support
to religious institutions by providing financial aid, public services, or
official endorsement. As Justice Black explained in Everson v. Board of
Education of Ewing Township in 1947, “In the words of Jefferson, the
clause against establishment of religion by law was intended to erect ‘a
wall of separation between church and State.’” More recently, Justice
Stevens emphasized “the impact of religious strife on the decisions of our
forebears to migrate to this continent, and on the decisions of neighbors
in the Balkans, Northern Ireland, and the Middle East to mistrust one
another. Whenever we remove a brick from the wall that was designed to
separate religion and government, we increase the risk of religious strife
and weaken the foundation of our democracy” (dissenting in Zelman
v. Simmons-Harris, 2002).
Under this standard, some cases are easy. The state cannot aid an established church, so if a Baptist church burns down, state funds cannot
be appropriated to rebuild it. But as the fire is burning, can a municipal
fire department put out the fire, or would that be using tax money and
public employees to aid religion? The answer obviously is that the fire
department can provide the same level of service to a religious institution as to a nonreligious institution. The relevant legal category when
the fire alarm rings is not “church” but rather “building on fire,” so
extinguishing the fire doesn’t breach the wall of separation, even though
tax dollars are being used to aid a religious activity. Putting out a fire
doesn’t entangle the state in religious matters or violate the state’s neutrality toward religion.
The Court has said that “the line of separation, far from being a
‘wall,’ is a blurred, indistinct, and variable barrier, depending on all the
circumstances of a particular relationship” (Lemon v. Kurtzman, 1971).
Harder cases involve the many ways that government supports or otherwise influences social institutions and community life. It defined the
Constitutional Rights
77
bounds of permissible government activities in Lemon v.  Kurtzman,
describing when government activity that affected religion did not violate the establishment clause: “First, the statute must have a secular
legislative purpose; second, its principal or primary effect must be one
that neither advances nor inhibits religion; finally, the statute must not
foster an excessive entanglement with religion.” The purpose-effectentanglement test provides some guidance but has been difficult to apply.
(Some scholars have said the Lemon test was appropriately named.)
Most of the justices on the current Court have criticized the Lemon test
without expressly repudiating it. As Justice Scalia noted, “When we wish
to strike down a practice it forbids, we invoke it; when we wish to uphold a practice it forbids, we ignore it entirely” (Lamb’s Chapel v. Center
Moriches Union Free School District, 1993).
Since the late 1990s, a majority of the Court has emphasized the neutrality principle rather than the possibility of entanglement or the perception of state endorsement of religion. In a world of pervasive government
benefits and services, the government does not violate the establishment
clause by providing financial support or other aid to religious entities
on the same basis as it does to others. Where a state university used the
proceeds of a student activities fee to fund student publications, it was
prevented by the establishment clause from discriminating against religious publications; in funding those publications, it was not endorsing a
viewpoint or aiding religion but only treating religious and nonreligious
groups the same (Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of the University of
Virginia, 1995).
One area that has generated a large number of cases is public aid to
nonpublic—principally religious—schools. Applying the Lemon test, the
Court held the state could not pay for textbooks in secular subjects in
religious schools but it could lend textbooks for secular subjects to religious school students, and it could not pay the salaries of teachers of
secular subjects but it could provide public school personnel for speech
and hearing tests at nonpublic schools and remedial and guidance services to religious school students at neutral sites. With its new emphasis
on neutrality, the Court has upheld sending public school teachers to
parochial schools for remedial instruction of disadvantaged children and
a program that loaned library books, computers, and other educational
materials to nonpublic schools.
The most contentious issue has concerned school voucher programs,
in which the state provides financial aid to students that can be used to
pay tuition at nonpublic schools. Ohio enacted a voucher program for
the city of Cleveland under which parents could enroll their children in
any school and receive tuition aid according to financial need. In fact,
Law 101
78
96 percent of the schools receiving benefits from the program were parochial schools. Nevertheless, a majority of the Court, in an opinion
by Chief Justice Rehnquist, held that the program did not violate the
establishment clause (Zelman v.  Simmons-Harris, 2002). Looking at
Cleveland’s entire system of public education, not just the voucher program, he regarded the program as “neutral in all respects toward religion.” Justice Souter in dissent argued that the issue was the voucher
program, not the entire education system, and the program was not
neutral, because it allowed the use of tax money “for teaching the covenant with Israel and Mosaic law in Jewish schools, the primacy of the
Apostle Peter and the Papacy in Catholic schools, the truth of reformed
Christianity in Protestant schools, and the revelation to the Prophet in
Muslim schools.”
Another area of continuing controversy has involved public displays of
religious significance. The core of the establishment clause, of course, is
that the government may not sponsor or promote religious activities, but
the Supreme Court has allowed governments to permit or engage in activities that less obviously endorse one religion. Legislative sessions and
other public meetings long have opened with a prayer, and the Court has
interpreted the establishment clause in line with that historical practice,
even upholding invocations that are explicitly sectarian and given only
by Christian ministers in a town (Town of Greece v. Galloway, 2014).
In a number of cases the Court evaluated holiday displays on public
property under what became known as the “plastic reindeer doctrine.”
Placing a nativity scene on the steps of a county courthouse constituted
a government endorsement of religion in violation of the establishment
clause, but a holiday display including a Christmas tree, a menorah, and
a sign celebrating a “Salute to Liberty” or a Christmas display including
plastic reindeer pulling Santa’s sleigh did not because it was a celebration of the holiday season (Lynch v. Donnelly, 1984; Allegheny County
v. ACLU, 1989).
The display of the Ten Commandments has become the most controversial type of public display with a potentially religious message.
In 2005 the Supreme Court addressed the issue in a pair of cases. In
McCreary County v.  ACLU of Kentucky the Court concluded that
the display of the Ten Commandments in county courthouses, first by
themselves and then, to forestall litigation, accompanied by other historical and religious texts, had a religious rather than a secular purpose. In placing one of the exhibits, for example, county officials noted
that the Kentucky House of Representatives had once adjourned with
a Christian flourish “in remembrance and honor of Jesus Christ, the
Prince of Ethics.” Although the counties claimed a secular purpose of
Constitutional Rights
79
emphasizing the historical significance of the Ten Commandments as
the basis of our laws, in light of the nature of the display and their
statements and actions the Court regarded that claim as a sham. In Van
Orden v.  Perry, on the other hand, a different majority of the Court
(with Justice Breyer providing the deciding vote in each case) upheld the
display of a Ten Commandments monument on the Texas State Capitol
grounds. The monument was one of seventeen monuments and twentyone historical markers on the grounds representing the state’s political
and legal history, and it had been placed by a secular organization forty
years earlier and thus outside the scope of the current controversy over
the Ten Commandments, so it need not be read as a state endorsement of
religion. Not every display of a religious symbol violated the establishment clause; as the Court noted, its own courtroom included a depiction
of Moses holding the tablets among a frieze depicting other lawgivers.
The Ten Commandments have historical significance as a source of law
and morality, and in evaluating their display, context is crucial.
The basic principle of the free exercise clause is as clear as the basic
principle of the establishment clause. As Justice Robert Jackson said in
West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette (1943):
If there is any fixed star in our constitutional constellation, it is that
no official, high or petty, can prescribe what shall be orthodox in
politics, nationalism, religion, or other matters of opinion or force
citizens to confess by word or act their faith therein.
Barnette involved a West Virginia statute that required all schoolchildren
to recite the Pledge of Allegiance to the Flag. The Barnette children were
expelled from school because, as Jehovah’s Witnesses, their religious
convictions prevented them from paying homage to a graven image. In
its decision—on Flag Day, June 14, 1943—the Court held the statute
violated the free exercise clause. The state could not punish the Barnettes
for acting in a manner required by their conscience.
The Barnette principle, that government may not compel acts of conscience, is well established and has been applied in other situations, forbidding, for example, mandatory prayer (vocal or silent) or Bible reading
in school. But most free exercise disputes involve acts of religious conscience that violate laws not directed at the acts themselves or that disadvantage the actor from receiving a government benefit. Suppose, for
example, that a person’s religion takes literally the biblical injunction
of “an eye for an eye” so that, having been partially blinded in an automobile accident, he pokes out the eye of the other driver. Can he be
prosecuted for following the dictates of his religion?
Law 101
80
The justices have disagreed about the standard to be applied to decide cases like this. In Sherbert v.  Verner (1963) the Court devised a
balancing test. If a challenger showed that a law substantially burdened
the free exercise of her religion, the government must offer a compelling
interest that justified the law. The Court would then balance the burden
on free exercise against the government interest and the extent to which
it would be harmed by exempting the challenger. In Sherbert the Court
struck down a rule that denied unemployment compensation benefits
to a Seventh-Day Adventist who refused to work on Saturday. The rule
imposed a significant burden on her religious exercise, and the state’s
interest—to prevent fraudulent claims—could be served in other ways.
In Employment Division v. Smith (1990), however, a changed Court
held that “generally applicable, religion-neutral laws that have the effect
of burdening a particular religious practice need not be justified by a
compelling governmental interest”—even if the law has the incidental
effect of burdening a particular religious practice. If a law is not directed
at religious practice and applies to all persons equally, it does not violate
the free exercise clause. In Smith, drug rehabilitation counselors who
were fired because they used peyote in a religious ceremony were not
entitled to state unemployment benefits because they violated a rule that
was neutral as to religion and of general application to all workers.
The balancing test of Sherbert v. Verner seems much more accommodating to religious liberty than the Smith test, but the Court has been
markedly unwilling to invalidate legislation on a free exercise basis
under either test. Under Sherbert, for example, it upheld the requirement that an Amish employer participate in the Social Security system
despite religious objections, refused to grant an orthodox Jewish officer an exemption to the Air Force’s ban on wearing nonuniform
clothing, including a yarmulke, and upheld the provision of the tax
laws that denies tax-exempt status to schools that discriminate on the
basis of race, even if the discrimination is religiously motivated. In
fact, the Court has held in only a few situations that the free exercise
clause exempts individuals from generally applicable laws because of
their religious convictions. One type of case involves an involuntary
profession of belief, as in the flag salute cases such as Barnette; those
cases involve free speech claims as well as religion claims. A second
type of case concerns employment situations, as in Sherbert and Smith.
Following Sherbert, the Court held that a state is required to exempt
persons from at least some of the conditions for receiving unemployment compensation benefits if they cannot satisfy the conditions because of religious convictions, and in Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical
Lutheran Church and School v. EEOC the Court used the free exercise
Constitutional Rights
81
clause and the establishment clause to grant religious institutions an exception from employment discrimination laws in the hiring and firing
of their clergy. A third type of case involves laws that on their face discriminate against religious institutions; for example, the Court struck
down a Missouri state program that reimbursed nonprofit groups for
purchasing playground surfaces made from recycled scrap tires but
expressly excluded churches or religious schools from the program
(Trinity Lutheran Church of Columbia v. Comer, 2017). The final exception is the singular case of Wisconsin v. Yoder (1972). There the
Court held that Wisconsin could not require Amish parents to send
their children to school beyond the eighth grade in violation of their
religious beliefs. The Court later characterized this decision as resting
not only on the free exercise clause but also on the expanded right of
privacy, which is discussed in the next section. The state’s compelling
interest was in assuring the development of adolescents as citizens and
members of society, but the combination of formal schooling through
the eighth grade and the training Amish children received at home and
in their community was deemed to satisfy the state’s interests.
What Other Rights Are Protected by the Constitution?
The Constitution protects many other important rights. Some of the
protections are now archaic. The Third Amendment prevents the government from ordering that homeowners provide quarters for soldiers
in peacetime, or in wartime except as provided by law, but it has been
a very long time since the government has even tried. Other protections
have only recently been defined. It was not until 2008 that the Supreme
Court definitively interpreted the Second Amendment to guarantee an
individual’s right to own guns. The Second Amendment’s unusual structure had generated much debate because, like few other constitutional
provisions, it contained both a prefatory clause (“A well regulated militia, being necessary to the security of a free state”) and an operative
clause (“the right of the people to keep and bear arms, shall not be
infringed”). Did the prefatory clause modify the operative clause, so the
right to bear arms applied only to those in the militia? In District of
Columbia v. Heller (2008) the Court ruled that the right was an individual right unrelated to militia service, so a District of Columbia law
banning the possession of handguns was unconstitutional.
The constitutional provisions that protect individual rights are vague,
but the conduct they protect is usually reasonably related to the text of
the particular constitutional provision that authorizes the protection.
For example, where the First Amendment protects freedom of speech, it
Law 101
82
is not too hard to see how that can be expanded to encompass nonverbal
communicative acts such as burning an American flag.
But what about some of the more unusual and controversial liberties
that the Supreme Court has decided are protected by the Constitution?
Where does the Constitution guarantee the right to obtain an abortion,
to engage in sexual behavior, to purchase contraceptives, or to travel
from state to state?
The answer is: everywhere and nowhere. Beyond the specific protections
of provisions such as the First Amendment and the due process clause,
the Supreme Court has defined constitutional protection for a variety of
fundamental rights, including the right to travel, the right to vote, and
the right of access to the courts. The Court also has recognized a right
of privacy as inherent in the Constitution and in our system of “ordered
liberty”; the right of privacy includes the right of parents to care for their
children, the right to control one’s sexual activity and reproduction, and
the right to make medical decisions. These rights protect a range of personal actions and intimate associations that are otherwise not protected
by particular constitutional provisions. The most controversial of these,
of course, is a woman’s right to choose to have an abortion.
The Constitution doesn’t mention privacy, travel, or sexual activity.
Where do the Supreme Court justices find a textual basis for these
rights?
Over a series of cases, the Court has concluded that particular constitutional guarantees of liberties are sources of “emanations” or “penumbral
rights” that are not found explicitly in the text. Different justices emphasize different sources, but the most prominent include the following:
• The First Amendment protects freedom of expression. To properly
exercise that right, people need to be able to study, learn, and be
exposed to ideas as they choose.
• The First Amendment also protects the freedom to associate to
achieve political objectives. Freedom of association can be effective
only if a person has a right to keep his or her associations and
activities private.
• The Fourth Amendment limits the government’s powers in the
criminal process by, for example, prohibiting the police from
searching a person’s belongings without a warrant or an emergency.
This rule is designed to prevent intrusive police behavior, but the
behavior is intrusive in large part because people have a penumbral
right to personal privacy.
Constitutional Rights
83
• The Ninth Amendment states: “The enumeration, in the Constitution
of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or disparage others
retained by the people.” There is considerable historical dispute about
the meaning of the amendment, but some justices have interpreted
it as assuming the existence of fundamental rights not specified
elsewhere in the Constitution.
When the Court puts together all of these individual rights, the whole is
greater than the sum of its parts. The extension of these textually based
rights creates a new right of privacy, grounded in a vision of personhood
read into the Constitution when it is understood as a whole. As constitutional scholar Laurence Tribe notes, it is not clear if the right of privacy
is a “unitary concept” or a “bag of unrelated goodies.” However it is
framed, it has generated some of the most ringing statements of human
freedom ever made by the justices. To quote them indicates the importance of the constitutional right of privacy.
Justice Louis Brandeis in dissent in Olmstead v. United States, 1928:
The makers of our Constitution undertook to secure conditions
favorable to the pursuit of happiness. . . . They conferred, as against
the government, the right to be let alone—the most comprehensive of
rights and the right most valued by civilized men.
Justice James McReynolds in Meyer v. Nebraska, 1923:
Without doubt, liberty denotes not merely freedom from bodily
restraint but also the right of the individual to contract, to engage in
any of the common occupations of life, to acquire useful knowledge,
to marry, establish a home and bring up children, to worship God
according to the dictates of his own conscience, and generally to
enjoy those privileges long recognized at common law as essential to
the orderly pursuit of happiness by free men.
Justice John Paul Stevens in dissent in Meachum v. Fano, 1976:
I had thought it self-evident that all men were endowed by their
Creator with liberty as one of the cardinal unalienable rights. It is that
basic freedom which the Due Process Clause protects, rather than the
particular rights or privileges conferred by specific laws or regulations.
The two most important early cases establishing the right of privacy
are Meyer v. Nebraska (1923) and Pierce v. Society of Sisters (1925). In
Meyer the state of Nebraska, in a burst of nativist fervor, had forbidden
the teaching of foreign languages before the eighth grade. In Pierce the
state of Oregon required all students to attend public schools. In both
Law 101
84
cases the Court struck down the legislation as interfering with “the
calling of modern language teachers, with the opportunities of pupils to
acquire knowledge, and with the power of parents to control the education of their own.” In a companion case to Pierce the Court applied its
holding to nonreligious private schools, demonstrating that the basis of
the decision was not freedom of religion but a broader right to be free of
state control in making personal decisions.
Meyer and Pierce demonstrated the importance of parental concern for
their children’s education. This is a part of a broader interest in family relations, including marriage, that is part of the right to privacy. In Loving
v.  Virginia (1967) the Court invalidated a Virginia law that prohibited marriage between blacks and whites, and in Boddie v. Connecticut
(1971) it held that a Connecticut law that required applicants for a divorce to pay a filing fee could not be applied to poor people who could
not afford to pay. Both cases illustrate how the right of privacy has developed. In each case the Court identified another doctrinal ground for
the decision (equal protection in Loving and due process in Boddie), but
in each case the opinions also recognized that marriage is a fundamental
right, so the state cannot unduly restrict a person’s ability to get into or
out of a marriage.
A more recent pair of cases demonstrates how the Court has developed the right of privacy and how the thinking of the justices can change
in a relatively short period of time. Michael Hardwick was charged
with violating Georgia’s sodomy law by committing a sexual act with
another man in his bedroom. In Bowers v. Hardwick in 1986, the Court
held that the law was constitutional. Justice White’s majority opinion
defined the issue as whether there was a fundamental constitutional
right to engage in homosexual conduct, found that the proscription of
homosexual acts had “ancient roots,” and declined to extend the right
of privacy that far. In 2003, however, a different majority of the Court
reached a different conclusion. In Lawrence v. Texas, Justice Kennedy’s
opinion criticized the historical basis of Bowers, noted changing public
attitudes toward homosexuality and the need for sexual autonomy (including a controversial reliance on sources of international law), and
held that Bowers was wrongly decided and should be overruled. Justice
White had incorrectly stated the issue as the right to engage in homosexual acts, where the real issue is the constitutionality of statutes
that “touch upon the most private human conduct, sexual behavior,
and in the most private of places, the home.” “Liberty,” according to
Justice Kennedy, “protects the person from unwarranted government
intrusions into a dwelling or other private places. In our tradition the
State is not omnipresent in the home. . . . Liberty presumes an autonomy
Constitutional Rights
85
of self that includes freedom of thought, belief, expression, and certain
intimate conduct.” Accordingly, John Lawrence and Tyron Garner, the
defendants who were convicted under a Texas statute criminalizing homosexual acts, were “entitled to respect for their private lives. The State
cannot demean their existence or control their destiny by making their
private sexual conduct a crime.”
The challenges of defining individual rights and determining the
proper role of the courts in applying them were sharply posed in the
series of cases concerning same-sex marriage. In 1996, as some states
were considering legalizing same-sex marriage, Congress enacted the
Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), part of which defined “marriage”
to exclude same-sex marriages. The definition controlled the application of more than a thousand federal laws, including the tax law.
Edith Windsor and Thea Spyer were married in Canada, a marriage
recognized by their state of residence, New York. Spyer died and left
her entire estate to Windsor, who was unable to claim the marital exemption from the federal estate tax because of DOMA, so she paid the
tax and sued for a refund.
In United States v. Windsor (2013), Justice Kennedy’s opinion for the
Court majority first noted that marriage has traditionally been a subject of state, not federal, law, and by recognizing same-sex marriage,
New York conferred on gay people “a dignity and status of immense import” and “enhanced the recognition, dignity, and protection of the class
in their own community.” DOMA, by contrast, “seeks to injure the very
class New York seeks to protect.” “The avowed purpose and practical
effect of the law . . . are to impose a disadvantage, a separate status, and
so a stigma” on those who enter into same-sex marriages. Accordingly,
the statute was unconstitutional as “a deprivation of the liberty of the
person protected by the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution,” a liberty
that was made even more specific and “better understood and preserved”
by the Fourteenth Amendment’s guarantee of equal protection. That liberty “withdraws from Government the power to degrade or demean the
way this law does.”
Justice Scalia issued a scathing dissent that posed sharply the issue of
the Court’s role:
This case is about power in several respects. It is about the power
of our people to govern themselves, and the power of this Court to
pronounce the law. Today’s opinion aggrandizes the latter with the
predictable consequence of diminishing the former. . . . The Court’s
errors on both points spring forth from the same diseased root: an
exalted conception of the role of this institution in America.
Law 101
86
He excoriated the vagueness of the constitutional support for the
majority’s opinion. Was it about federalism, suggesting that DOMA had
invaded the states’ traditional power to regulate marriage? Or was it
about equal protection, although the majority suggests that equal protection only makes some other grant of liberty more specific? Or was it
about a penumbral right through the due process clause, a right the majority refrained from invoking?
Then came Obergefell v. Hodges (2015). James Obergefell and John
Arthur met, fell in love, and established a decades-long committed relationship. In 2011 John was diagnosed with ALS, or Lou Gehrig’s disease,
a debilitating, progressive illness with no cure. James and John wanted
to commit to one another and marry before John died. They flew from
their home in Ohio to Maryland, where same-sex marriage was legal;
they were wed in a medical transport plane sitting on the tarmac because it was too difficult for John to move. He died three months later.
Because Ohio did not recognize their marriage, James could not be listed
as the surviving spouse on John’s death certificate, rendering them, as the
Supreme Court said, “strangers even in death.” James sued to be shown
as the surviving spouse on John’s death certificate.
The Supreme Court held that the Fourteenth Amendment’s due process
clause and equal protection clause required states to issue marriage licenses
to same-sex couples and to recognize such marriages performed in other
states. Justice Kennedy drew four principles from the Court’s privacy cases:
A first premise of the Court’s relevant precedents is that the right
to personal choice regarding marriage is inherent in the concept of
individual autonomy.
A second principle in this Court’s jurisprudence is that the right to
marry is fundamental because it supports a two-person union unlike
any other in its importance to the committed individuals.
A third basis for protecting the right to marry is that it safeguards
children and families and thus draws meaning from related rights of
childrearing, procreation, and education.
Fourth and finally, this Court’s cases and the Nation’s traditions
make clear that marriage is a keystone of our social order.
Applying these principles, he concluded that the historical discrimination against gay people could not be squared with the contemporary
understanding of liberty:
The limitation of marriage to opposite-sex couples may long have
seemed natural and just, but its inconsistency with the central
Constitutional Rights
87
meaning of the fundamental right to marry is now manifest. With
that knowledge must come the recognition that laws excluding samesex couples from the marriage right impose stigma and injury of the
kind prohibited by our basic charter.
Four justices dissented, principally on the basis that the majority stepped
beyond its judicial role. Chief Justice Roberts recognized that there were
strong arguments in favor of Obergefell’s position but found them to be
irrelevant:
This Court is not a legislature. Whether same-sex marriage is a good
idea should be of no concern to us. Under the Constitution, judges
have power to say what the law is, not what it should be. . . . The
majority’s decision is an act of will, not legal judgment. The right it
announces has no basis in the Constitution or this Court’s precedent.
Justice Scalia was characteristically blunt:
Today’s decree says that my Ruler, and the Ruler of 320 million
Americans coast-to-coast, is a majority of the nine lawyers on the
Supreme Court. . . . This practice of constitutional revision by an
unelected committee of nine, always accompanied (as it is today) by
extravagant praise of liberty, robs the People of the most important
liberty they asserted in the Declaration of Independence and won in
the Revolution of 1776: the freedom to govern themselves.
The area in which perhaps the broadest expansion of the right to privacy has come, and the area in which it has generated the most heat, is in
reproductive rights. Meyer and Pierce concerned the government’s power
to control people’s minds; the reproductive rights cases, like Bowers and
Lawrence, concern the government’s power to control a person’s body.
Two cases in the 1960s and 1970s transformed the right to privacy
and brought the Court full force into the area of reproductive rights.
In Griswold v. Connecticut (1965) the executive director and the medical director of Planned Parenthood were convicted of giving advice to
married couples on contraceptives, in violation of a Connecticut statute
that forbade the use of contraceptives or the giving of advice on them.
The defendants were allowed to raise in defense the right of married
persons to use contraceptives, a right that the Court found not in a particular constitutional text but in the “penumbras [of specific guarantees
of the Bill of Rights], formed by emanations from those guarantees that
help give them life.” The Court described the right to privacy in marriage
Law 101
88
as “older than the Bill of Rights—older than our political parties, older
than our school system. Marriage is a coming together for better or
for worse, hopefully enduring, and intimate to the degree of being sacred. . . . [I]t is an association for as noble a purpose as any involved
in our prior decisions.” Such a right, the Court concluded, was fundamental in a free society and could not be invaded by so broad a government regulation.
Griswold was followed by Eisenstadt v. Baird (1972), which made
clear that the right to privacy in the area of reproduction was not limited to married couples. The defendant in Eisenstadt was convicted of
violating state law by providing contraceptives to an unmarried woman.
In overturning the conviction, the Court stated:
Yet the marital couple is not an independent entity with a mind and
heart of its own, but an association of two individuals each with a
separate intellectual and emotional makeup. If the right to privacy
means anything, it is the right of the individual, married or single,
to be free from unwarranted governmental intrusion into matters so
fundamentally affecting a person as the decision whether to bear or
beget a child.
Griswold, Eisenstadt, and other contraceptive cases were a novel extension of the privacy doctrine but not too controversial in themselves. The storm broke in 1973 when the Court decided Roe v. Wade
and concluded that the right of privacy is “broad enough to encompass a woman’s decision whether or not to terminate her pregnancy.”
Subsequently the Supreme Court faced dozens of abortion cases, and
the lower courts hundreds of cases, as states and the federal government
struggled over accommodations, evasions, exceptions, and outright
challenges to the Court’s decision. And, of course, the ferment spilled
outside the courtrooms into electoral politics, large demonstrations,
picketing of abortion clinics, and even the murder of physicians who
provided abortions to their patients.
Let’s begin with a quick summary of the abortion rights cases in the
Supreme Court. Most constitutional rights issues require the Court to
weigh the interest of the affected individual against the interest that the
government asserts in attempting to regulate the individual’s conduct.
In Roe the Court identified three interests. The woman’s interest in deciding whether or not to terminate the pregnancy is an aspect of the interest in personal autonomy that extends from Meyer and Pierce through
Griswold and Eisenstadt. The state has two interests in affecting that decision: Because abortion is a medical procedure, the state has an interest
Constitutional Rights
89
in seeing that the procedure is performed under conditions that ensure
the patient’s safety. The state also has an interest in protecting the fetus.
Because the decision to continue or terminate a pregnancy entails
basic questions about control of a woman’s life, the Court considered
it to be a constitutionally fundamental right. Therefore, the state could
regulate that right only if it had a compelling interest in doing so and
if its regulations were narrowly tailored to achieve that interest. The
state’s interest in protecting the health of the mother is not compelling
during the first trimester of pregnancy; until that point, the risks of abortion are less than the risk of normal childbirth. After the first trimester,
the state may regulate abortions in a manner reasonably calculated to
protect the mother’s health by, for example, requiring that the procedure be performed by a qualified person in a licensed facility. Because
the Court concluded that a fetus is not a person either for purposes of
the Fourteenth Amendment or for other legal rules, the state’s interest
in protecting the fetus also is not compelling at the early stages of the
pregnancy. When it becomes viable (i.e., capable of living outside its
mother’s womb) in the last trimester, however, the state has “logical and
biological” justifications for protecting the fetus. Therefore, during the
last trimester of the pregnancy, the state’s compelling interest allows it to
constitutionally prohibit abortions unless the life or health of the mother
is endangered by continuing the pregnancy.
After the Roe decision, the legislatures in many states still attempted
to restrict or regulate the right to abortion. The Court responded by
applying the interest analysis in numerous cases. For example, the state
could advance its interest in protecting the mother’s health by requiring
that abortions be performed only in hospitals or clinics that met specified
safety standards, but it could not require that abortions be performed
only in full-service hospitals; the former but not the latter requirement
was reasonably designed to protect the mother’s health. Although the
government was required to honor a woman’s right to an abortion, it
was not required to enhance the exercise of the right; the federal government, for example, constitutionally could refuse to use Medicaid funds
to pay for abortions.
Over the next twenty years, especially as the composition of the
Court changed, the structure of the Roe interest analysis wavered.
Finally, in Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992), the Court seemed to
settle the fundamental issue of abortion rights, at least for a time, as
a plurality of the Court reaffirmed that the right to choose an abortion was fundamental but suggested that the compelling interest test
leading to a trimester analysis in Roe might be abandoned in favor
of a test that asked whether the state regulation imposed an “undue
Law 101
90
burden” on the woman’s right. Unlike Roe’s trimester analysis, the
undue burden test is heavily fact-intensive; the test directs courts to
examine whether a state restriction on abortion has the purpose or
effect of placing a substantial obstacle in the path of a woman seeking
an abortion. In Casey itself, for example, a mandatory twenty-fourhour waiting period between the time a woman discussed the abortion with a physician and the procedure itself was held to not unduly
burden her choice because the lower court had found only that it was
particularly burdensome on some women, not unduly burdensome on
all women. However, a requirement that a woman certify that she
had notified her husband that she was to undergo an abortion was
held unconstitutional because of extensive findings that the possibility
of domestic violence or psychological abuse by the husband would
deter many women from seeking an abortion. Similarly, in Stenberg
v. Carhart (2000) the Court applied the principles of Casey to hold
that Nebraska’s ban, except in narrow circumstances, on certain lateterm abortion procedures that the legislature described as “partialbirth abortion” was unconstitutional because it lacked an exception
for the health of the mother and imposed an undue burden on the
woman’s choice of an abortion procedure. In Whole Women’s Health
v. Hellerstedt (2016) the Court struck down a Texas statute that required physicians performing abortions to have admitting privileges
at a nearby hospital and that required abortion facilities to meet the
same standards as ambulatory surgical centers. The statute would
have forced many abortion providers to close and many women to be
denied effective access to abortions; for example, 2 million women of
reproductive age would live more than fifty miles from an abortion
provider, and 750,000 would live more than two hundred miles from
an abortion provider. This would place an undue burden on the right
of Texas women to choose an abortion with little or no corresponding
benefit in improving women’s health and safety.
The abortion issue has generated hundreds of judicial opinions and
pieces of legislation, political controversy, philosophical debate, and
angry rhetoric. It would be impossible to review all of the law on the
topic, much less the other dimensions of the issue. But because abortion
is such a controversial topic, it is a good vehicle to summarize two of the
most important points about constitutional law covered in this and the
previous chapter.
First, where does the right to an abortion come from? More generally, how does the Court determine what the Constitution means? To
those who argue for “strict construction” or “judicial restraint,” this
whole process seems like an unprincipled power grab. It’s bad enough
Constitutional Rights
91
when the Court stretches the meaning of a single constitutional phrase,
but here the justices seem to be slapping together a series of unrelated
provisions to come up with the authority to declare as constitutional law
their personal preferences about a controversial issue, unfettered by any
particular constitutional text. In doing so, the unelected justices thwart
the will of the democratic branches of government on issues such as
protecting the rights of an unborn fetus.
This argument has some appeal to it. Surely there is nothing in the
Constitution that spells out the right of privacy or the consequences for
particular legislation such as abortion regulations. But that brings us
back to the issue of the proper method of constitutional interpretation
with which our discussion of constitutional law began. There is nothing
in any provision of the Constitution that tells the Court how to decide
a case. What the Court has done in creating the right of privacy is the
same thing it does in other areas: It tries to make sense of the constitutional scheme, which inevitably involves interpreting specific provisions
of the text, weighing one portion of the text against another, and considering judicial interpretations along with social, political, and economic
developments subsequent to the adoption of the Constitution. In this
area the Court has defined the common core of freedoms it sees as essential to our form of political community. The justices have not always
agreed on the content of that core, but they generally have agreed that
the process of attempting to establish it is a valid one.
Justices Sandra Day O’Connor, Anthony Kennedy, and David Souter,
in the central opinion in Casey, engaged in this process of constructing
an understanding of the Constitution. They tried to define what general
principle underlay all of the previous privacy cases and concluded that
Our precedents “have respected the private realm of family life
which the state cannot enter.” These matters, involving the most
intimate and personal choices a person may make in a lifetime,
choices central to personal dignity and autonomy, are central to the
liberty protected by the Fourteenth Amendment.
Accordingly, the abortion decision is so “intimate and personal”
that the state cannot simply impose its view of the choice on a
pregnant woman.
But this is antidemocratic, isn’t it? In a sense, it is. That’s what constitutional law is all about. The will of a temporary majority, the sentiments
of the moment, a vote in the legislature, cannot upset basic constitutional
guarantees. In determining the content of those guarantees, though, the
Court is not free to ignore the sentiment of the moment; the Court’s view
Law 101
92
of what rights are fundamental can be shaped by the temperament of the
times as to what rights are fundamental.
That leads to the second point. Is constitutional law really law, or
is this just a form of politics in which the judges enact their personal
preferences? The issue was posed sharply by Justice Harry Blackmun’s
opinion in Casey. After pointing out the basic conflict between the majority and dissenting justices over whether Roe should be overruled, the
author of the Court’s opinion in Roe closed with an unusual personal
statement:
In one sense, the Court’s approach is worlds apart from that of the
Chief Justice and Justice Scalia [who dissented in Casey]. And yet, in
another sense the distance between the two approaches is short—the
distance is but a single vote.
I am 83 years old. I cannot remain on the Court forever, and when
I do step down, the confirmation process for my successor well may
focus on the issue before us today. That, I regret, may be exactly
where the choice between the two worlds will be made.
Blackmun was right in raising the political process of nomination and
confirmation of justices as an essential element of the making of constitutional law. But he also pointed out what was remarkable about Casey:
Make no mistake, the joint opinion of Justices O’Connor, Kennedy,
and Souter is an act of personal courage and constitutional principle.
In contrast to previous decisions in which Justices O’Connor and
Kennedy postponed reconsideration of Roe v. Wade, the authors of
the joint opinion today join Justice Stevens and me in concluding
that “the essential holding of Roe v. Wade should be retained and
once again reaffirmed.”
Why was this considered an act of personal courage? All three were
appointed by conservative Republican presidents (O’Connor and
Kennedy by Reagan and Souter by George H. W. Bush). The O’Connor
and Kennedy appointments were hailed by conservatives as presaging a
shift away from liberal activism toward greater conservatism. (Souter’s
judicial politics were perceived as unknown to moderate at the time of
his appointment.) And Kennedy was a devout Catholic. Yet  all three
ended up supporting abortion rights, not as a matter of personal preference but, as Blackmun said, “of constitutional principle.”
What are we to make of this? Obviously, constitutional decision
making is not all a matter of personal preference and political choice.
Constitutional Rights
93
But surely it is part of that as well; even though these three justices favored abortion rights, on other issues they were noticeably more conservative than their liberal predecessors of the Warren Court era. The three
justices were not bound by the constitutional text or the prior decisions
of the Court; they could have read the text differently and concluded
that Roe was wrongly decided, as Rehnquist and Scalia did. But they felt
themselves to be bound by what they concluded was the correct interpretation of the Constitution and by the Court’s prior decisions. They
found in the prior privacy decisions a broad principle of personal liberty,
and they concluded that the principle supported the continued application of a woman’s right to choose expressed in Roe.

4
Your Day in Court
The Litigation Process
Litigation is the part of the legal system that people think of first. See you
in court. Don’t make a federal case out of it. I’ll take this all the way to
the Supreme Court. It is also the most complex part of the system. Some
litigation is simple, such as a landlord-tenant dispute in small claims
court. But much of litigation is vastly complex—armies of lawyers using
arcane forms to fight about peripheral issues at great expense. How can
lawyers make things so complicated? Does it have to be that way? The
answers lie in the subject that law students find to be the most alien to
their experience—civil procedure.
What Is Civil Procedure?
Litigation is the legal system’s mechanism for resolving disputes between
private parties; civil procedure is the body of law that structures the
mechanism.
Litigation begins with a dispute between two or more people,
companies, or institutions. Any kind of dispute can get the process
going: an automobile accident, a broken contract, a sexual harassment
claim by an employee, a civil rights claim against the government. If the
disputants cannot settle their problem themselves, they can hire lawyers
to negotiate, threaten, or otherwise try to resolve the dispute. If that
doesn’t work either, then it’s off to court.
In the olden days, the king of England would sit and “hold court”;
that is, he would sit in a public square, courtyard, or other open space
and, among his other royal duties, dispense justice. John Doe, one of the
king’s subjects, would come complaining that Richard Roe, a neighbor,
had injured Doe’s ox, causing it to go lame. The king would summon
Roe, hear what they each had to say, and decide whether Roe had to pay
for the damage to the ox. (Doe and Roe are the traditional names for
Law 101
96
fictitious or anonymous litigants. The plaintiff in the famous abortion
case Roe v. Wade followed this convention in styling herself Jane Roe, to
conceal her true identity.) Over time, because the king had to issue royal
proclamations, keep ambitious noblemen in line, fight wars, and do the
other things kings do, he became too busy to hear all of his subjects’ individual disputes, so he delegated the authority to do so to some of his
royal officials. Over even more time, those officials institutionalized their
function and became judges conducting litigation in courts.
This little story tells us much of what we need to know about litigation. Litigation is a process of authoritative dispute resolution by the
government. People with problems present their arguments to officials
empowered by the government to hear their arguments and resolve the
dispute. By playing out some of the details and implications of the story,
we can get a more complete understanding of civil procedure and the
litigation process.
First, Doe doesn’t have to go to court, and most of the time, people like
Doe won’t go to court. Maybe the ox isn’t that badly injured and Doe
doesn’t want to be thought of as a disputatious person, so he decides to
forget the whole thing. Or he talks to Roe and they reach an amicable
understanding that Roe will let Doe borrow his ox when he needs it.
Perhaps he wants to sue but he can’t take time away from farming to
travel to the king’s court.
Even today, litigation is a rare event. People suffer many harms and
indignities in everyday life, but relatively few of them end up in litigation. Litigation is an expensive, time-consuming, and emotionally
draining process that is reserved for cases of real significance, measured
in both social importance and money. The lawsuits discussed in this
chapter and elsewhere in the book are only the tip of the iceberg of the
social problems that the litigation process could address.
Second, litigation in countries under the influence of English law, including the United States, is an adversary process. The contending parties
are in control of the process. Doe decides whether to bring his case before the king in court and what to say when he gets there. Roe has the
opportunity to present his own facts and argument. The king’s job is to
listen to both and then decide.
Today the system is much more complicated, but it still is essentially adversarial. Civil litigation is a contest between the parties, and
the lawyers for the parties have the primary role in shaping the litigation. The lawyers decide whom, where, and when to sue, what legal
issues to raise, how to investigate the facts, and what witnesses and other
evidence to present. The judge is the referee who makes sure that the
lawyers follow the rules of the game and ultimately decides the case or
The Litigation Process
97
supervises a jury in its decision of the case. The pure model of the adversary system is never entirely observed in practice, however. Especially
in recent years, as the volume of cases has mounted and courts have
become more crowded, judges have become more inclined to manage
the cases in front of them by trying to narrow the issues, encourage settlement, and generally move things along.
Third, litigation always involves both finding facts and making or
applying legal policies. When the king hears Doe say that Roe injured
the ox, that’s not the end of the story. Roe responds that he borrowed the
ox from Doe but the ox appeared to be slightly lame when he borrowed
it, even though the injury may have worsened when the ox stepped into
a hole in Roe’s field. The king has to decide when the ox was lamed
and, if Roe did it, whether one who borrows an ox is responsible for
an accidental injury to the borrowed animal. The same is true in every
case today.
Fourth, civil litigation is not the only form of governmental dispute
resolution. If Roe borrows Doe’s ox and never returns it, Doe could ask
the king to make Roe return it or pay for it; we would think of that as a
civil action. But when the king hears the story, he might also take matters
into his own hands and send Roe to jail for stealing the ox; that would be
a criminal action. A dispute between two people, when the government’s
only role is to provide the system for dispute resolution (the courts), is
civil litigation; typical remedies in civil cases are judgments for money
damages or an order to do something (such as return the ox). When the
government pursues the action and the potential sanction includes a fine,
imprisonment, or even capital punishment, it is criminal litigation.
Finally, when the English king held court individually and decided his
subjects’ disputes himself, there was little need for rules about who could
bring a complaint or what process they had to observe. The king was the
fountainhead of justice and the principal authority figure in the realm, so
if subjects had problems, they could simply go to him and present their
stories. As courts became institutionalized, matters became more complicated. Today, courts would be overwhelmed if people simply walked in
and voiced their complaints. To cope with this situation, legislatures and
courts have devised rules to govern the litigation process. The main body
of those rules is known as the law of civil procedure, which regulates
every step of the civil litigation process from beginning to end.
Civil procedure is often the most difficult subject for law students
to learn because it is so foreign to them. Everyone knows a little about
promises, accidents, and ownership, so they can begin to understand the
basics of contract law, tort law, and property law. But civil procedure
is uniquely lawyers’ law. This chapter tries to explain this alien body
Law 101
98
of civil procedure in the context of an account of the goals and values
of procedural rules and litigation systems. There is a big picture here,
involving basic values that we want the systems to serve. If you keep the
big picture in mind—beginning with the simple hypothetical about Doe
and Roe—the details are easier to digest.
Why Do We Need Civil Litigation and Civil Procedure?
The complaints are voiced in the news, on social media, and in political
campaigns: Too much litigation. Too many lawyers. Everyone is getting
sued for everything. No matter if you win or lose, it will cost you a
fortune.
Much of the complaining is about the substantive law and not civil
procedure or the litigation system. Commentators are concerned that
tort law has gotten out of hand, for example. But a lot of the criticism is
directed at procedural law and the lawyers and judges who implement it.
Too cumbersome, too expensive, and too time-consuming. Does it have
to be this way?
Go back to the beginning: Problems arise between people; many of
the problems go away by themselves, and others are solved through
negotiation, economic pressure, or other informal means. But there remains a residuum of disputes that the parties cannot solve for themselves. The litigation process provides a mechanism for resolving those
disputes.
Consider what happens in subcultures in which litigation is unavailable. Among drug dealers, for example, disputes and claims of right
are likely to be settled with drive-by shootings. But even aside from
the threat of violence, the presence of unresolved grievances corrodes
the public’s sense of social order and well-being. In a fair, well-ordered,
smoothly functioning society, problems get solved and injustices get
corrected.
We don’t need a complex, adversarial litigation system to resolve these
disputes, however. We could adopt a much cheaper, simpler procedure—
a judge could simply flip a coin to decide who wins. Or the judge could
decide in favor of the party who slipped him the largest bribe. That
system could resolve many more problems at a much lower cost. But a
judicial system based on chance or corruption violates two of our fundamental beliefs about fairness: The courts should render decisions based
on rules of substantive law that are fair, and they should do so after
observing a fair process.
The first task of civil procedure, then, is to implement substantive
rules of law and the values and policies on which they are based. When
The Litigation Process
99
a legislature or court announces a rule of law, the rule acquires authority
simply by virtue of being the law. People respect the law and usually
obey it without the threat of sanctions for failing to do so. But litigation
provides both a backup mechanism for those cases in which people do
not conform their conduct to the requirements of the law and a forum
in which the values and policies underlying the law can be articulated,
reinforced, and worked out in new situations. Although no procedural
system does this perfectly, a good system will reduce the possibility of
error by removing the barriers to a focused decision-making process.
Civil procedure has a second task, too. We are offended by a dispute
resolution system based on chance or corruption because it violates our
understanding of fair process. Civil procedure has an independent value
in creating a litigation process that conforms to our concepts of fairness.
A fair procedural system provides a public affirmation of our belief in
justice under law. It also affirms the dignity of the individual litigants
and of others like them. Litigation, like electoral politics, is an arena in
which individuals can assert their values and the significance of their
own interests. “Having your day in court” is a cherished American tradition. The role of civil procedure is to make sure that the day in court
is a meaningful one.
Under an adversary system as developed in the United States, fair process has several essential components. Parties to litigation must have
an opportunity to adequately develop the facts and law in support of
their cases and to present the relevant facts and legal arguments to the
decision maker. In the typical case, the parties must have a right to have
a jury determine the facts of the case. The jury and judge must be neutral to both parties, must listen to their evidence and arguments, and
must decide the matter solely on the basis of the evidence and arguments
presented. The parties must be able to have the adjudication reviewed
for error by an appellate court and to have serious errors corrected.
After review, the decision must have finality, so the parties cannot be
subjected to endless relitigation of the same issues.
Finally, civil procedure has a third task. In order to be fair, civil procedure must be efficient. Too much fair process, like too much of any other
good thing, is counterproductive. If litigants had unlimited opportunities
to present their cases, litigation would become unbearably cumbersome,
time-consuming, and expensive. Moreover, the litigation system is a social resource that the government provides to individual citizens. There
is undeniable benefit to individuals and the society as a whole from a
fair and effective litigation process, but how much justice can we afford?
Accordingly, procedural rules have to balance the benefits of better process against the burdens of expense and delay.
Law 101
100
Where Do Court Cases Come From?
Let’s take a case and follow it through the litigation process. Litigation
is so diverse that no case is typical, but the facts of this one are pretty ordinary. (The result was not, however; as we will see later, this case ended
up in the U.S. Supreme Court.)
Harry and Kay Robinson and their two children, Eva and George,
were moving from New York to a new home in Arizona. As they were
driving their year-old Audi 100 LS along Interstate 44 in Oklahoma en
route to Arizona, their car was struck from behind by a Ford Torino
driven by a drunk driver going around 90 to 100 mph. The impact of the
collision crushed the rear end of the Audi, jammed the doors shut, and
punctured the car’s gas tank. The Robinsons’ car burst into flames, and
Kay Robinson and the two children were severely burned.
It may be a little surprising that the Robinsons did not sue the drunk
driver who struck their car. Instead, they sued Audi AG, the German
company that manufactured the car; Volkswagen of America, Inc.,
the U.S. company that imported Audis; Seaway Volkswagen, Inc., the
dealer in New York from whom they bought the car; and World-Wide
Volkswagen Corp., the regional distributor that had sold the car to
Seaway. This turn of events helps us think about how disputes make
their way into the court system.
The first steps in initiating litigation are to recognize that there is a
problem and that the problem is potentially subject to legal resolution.
In the case of the Robinsons’ potential suit against the drunk driver, it’s
easy to take those steps. The Robinsons suffered a severe injury. They
knew, as we all do, that there is a legal remedy for injuring someone else
by driving carelessly.
The Robinsons’ suit against the Audi defendants is less obvious. It
requires a little more knowledge of the law and the situation to recognize that they might have a suit against the manufacturer and sellers of
the car for a product defect that exacerbated their injuries. Perhaps those
issues arose only when they consulted a lawyer who was experienced in
auto accident litigation.
There is a very general point here. As Professor Marc Galanter, one of
the most thoughtful scholars of the litigation process, has said, there is
“a vast sea of events, encounters, collisions, rivalries, disappointments,
discomforts and injuries” in the world, but only when the victim
recognizes the possibility of legal resolution does the event become a
potential lawsuit.
A victim’s recognition that a potential legal dispute exists is only the
first step. It must be worthwhile to incur the costs of the legal process
The Litigation Process
101
rather than using alternative means of dispute resolution or forgetting
the whole thing. In the Robinsons’ case, the obvious suit against the
drunk driver probably was unattractive because the driver had little or
no insurance or assets to pay a judgment. People seldom litigate just to
establish a principle; unless there is something to be gained, they will not
spend the time and they will be unable to find a lawyer to invest in the
litigation.
Even if there is a potential recovery, alternative means of dealing with
the problem may be better. Especially if an auto accident is relatively
minor, the injured party will settle with her own or the other driver’s
insurance company rather than sue. Even when they have a viable cause
of action and a good chance to get a money judgment, homeowners
often do not litigate against their neighbors and businesses do not litigate against their suppliers; the bad feelings generated are not worth the
dollars recovered.
In an increasing number of consumer disputes, parties are required by
the terms of a form contract to submit their disputes to arbitration rather
than litigate. Websites, banks, and other businesses attempt to avoid litigation altogether through these terms. In arbitration, procedures are
more limited, there is no jury, and one arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators
who are not judges decide the case. Whether businesses should be allowed
to preempt litigation in this way is a controversial aspect of contract law
discussed in Chapter 6.
An important element of the decision to pursue litigation is the
victim’s ability to obtain a lawyer to pursue the matter. One way or another, lawyers have to be paid by the parties. In serious personal injury
cases like the Robinsons’, even victims of moderate means can get the
best lawyers, because the lawyers commonly will take the case on a contingent fee basis, under which they are paid a percentage of the eventual
recovery. In other cases, though, many otherwise meritorious claims will
never be brought because the potential recovery for the lawyer is too
small and the client can’t pay the lawyer directly.
One massive study of civil litigation tried to attach some numbers
to this process of filtering out potential cases. The figures vary widely
depending on the type of case and the people involved, but here are the
rough results. First take a roundup of, say, 10,000 bad experiences of all
kinds—a slip on a neighbor’s icy sidewalk, a new toaster that breaks, a
landlord’s failure to provide enough hot water to a tenant. The injured
party in 1,000 of these incidents will see herself as the victim of a wrong
caused by some other person (the neighbor, the manufacturer of the
toaster, the landlord). Of these people, 700 will complain to the wrongdoer about the problem; the other 300 will let it go. The wrongdoer will
Law 101
102
reject the claim in 450 of the cases, and the victim will go see a lawyer in
about 100 of those cases. The lawyer will file a case in court in 50 cases.
The parties will settle 25 to 35 of those cases, the court will dispose of
most of the rest without a trial, and perhaps 2 or 3 cases will go to trial,
and only one of those will be a jury trial.
The Robinsons made it through these filters. They found a lawyer
willing to take their case, and the lawyer assessed the potential legal
theories and identified defendants who might be held liable and who
would be able to pay if they were. Probably the lawyer found that the
driver who hit them had no insurance or assets or too little to pay for
their injuries, and he contacted Audi, who refused to settle the case for
an adequate amount, so he decided it was time to sue.
Where Can a Lawsuit Be Brought?
Two kinds of considerations are involved when a lawyer decides where
to bring a suit. The first is a legal issue: Which courts have the authority
to hear the case? The second is a strategic issue: In which court is it
most advantageous to litigate? We deal with those issues in the next few
sections.
The law of civil procedure frames the first issue as involving jurisdiction. Jurisdiction, translated from the Latin, means “to speak the law.”
Anyone can speak the law, but only a court with jurisdiction can speak
the law authoritatively. If a court does not have jurisdiction, or legal authority over the parties and the case, it cannot lawfully hear the case, and
any decision it reaches is not valid or binding on the parties.
To lawfully adjudicate a case, a court must have both subject matter
jurisdiction and personal jurisdiction. Subject matter jurisdiction
empowers a court to hear the kind of case at issue, and personal jurisdiction permits the court to exercise authority over the parties to
the dispute. For a court to hear the Robinsons’ case, therefore, it must
have power over tort claims arising out of automobile accidents (subject
matter jurisdiction) and power to compel the defendants to litigate before the court, and, if the Robinsons win, to pay a judgment (personal
jurisdiction).
Three states have a logical relationship to the accident and the parties
that makes them obvious places to bring suit. The accident occurred
in Oklahoma. The Robinsons had purchased their Audi in New York
from Seaway Volkswagen, one of the defendants, and they were still
legal residents of New York at the time of the accident. And they were on
their way to establish a new legal residence in Arizona. Therefore, they
might logically have brought suit in the courts of Oklahoma, New York,
The Litigation Process
103
or Arizona. (We restrict our analysis to American courts; it is possible
but unlikely that they would have sued in Germany, the home of Audi.)
Every state has a set of courts called courts of general jurisdiction
that are empowered to hear most kinds of civil cases, including tort,
contract, and property claims. These are the basic-level trial courts that
hear the bulk of the state’s judicial business. Usually the subject matter
jurisdiction of courts of general jurisdiction is unrestricted; the state constitutional provision or statute that gives them authority is expressed
in broad language, giving them “original jurisdiction in all civil, probate, and criminal cases, except as otherwise provided herein,” as the
Colorado constitution provides. By tradition, the general jurisdiction
courts of different states have different names. In Arizona, the Superior
Court is the court of general jurisdiction; in Oklahoma, it’s the District
Court; and, strangely enough, in New York the general jurisdiction court
is known as the Supreme Court. (In New York, the highest court in the
state, which is known practically everywhere else as the state’s supreme
court, is called the Court of Appeals.) Every state also has courts of
limited jurisdiction, such as a family court, whose subject matter jurisdiction is limited to divorce and child custody issues, a probate court,
with jurisdiction limited to inheritance matters, and a small claims court,
which has jurisdiction only over cases involving relatively small dollar
amounts.
Another traditional division of courts is into law and equity. As the
royal courts became more rigid and bureaucratic in the thirteenth century, frustrated litigants turned to the king as the fount of justice. The
king assigned his right-hand man, the chancellor, to provide more flexible justice in cases in which the law courts would not. Over time the
chancellor’s exercise of discretion itself became institutionalized in a
court of chancery or, because its goal was fairness, of equity.
The existence of two competing judicial systems became a point of
conflict in the struggles between the crown and Parliament and, later,
between the crown and American colonists, for whom the equity courts
were a symbol of royal authority. Beginning in the nineteenth century,
the conflict faded as law and equity merged into a single system. Today,
equity remains important as a distinctive set of remedies and procedures.
When a litigant seeks an injunction (a court order compelling someone
to do or not do something) rather than money damages, for example,
it is an equitable matter. Injunctions are available in some private cases
when the legal remedy of damages is inadequate, as when one business
seeks to enjoin another from illegally using its trademark. They also are
used in civil rights cases and similar public litigation; the desegregation
of schools in the South through the 1950s and 1960s was ordered by
Law 101
104
federal courts exercising their equitable powers. One final, important
consequence of the distinction is that, in equity, the judge decides the
case without a jury.
The Robinsons also have to sue in a court that has personal jurisdiction over the potential defendants. In most cases personal jurisdiction
is easy. Suppose first that they want to sue the driver of the Ford that
hit their car. They certainly can do so in Oklahoma, the state in which
the accident occurred, because committing a tort in a state provides a
basis for jurisdiction. If the Ford driver lives in Texas, the Robinsons
can sue him there, because a person always can be sued in the state in
which he or she has legal residence. But the personal jurisdiction issue is
trickier when the defendants have a less obvious relationship to the state
in which the suit is brought and when they are corporations, not people,
for whom it is harder to pin down where they are and where they act.
Which courts, then, have personal jurisdiction over Audi, Volkswagen,
World-Wide, and Seaway?
This issue has been addressed in a series of confusing U.S. Supreme
Court cases dating back more than a century and featuring World-Wide
Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, as the Robinsons’ case was called when
it reached the U.S. Supreme Court in 1980. To make it simple, think
about why we feel comfortable if the Robinsons sue the Ford driver in
Oklahoma or in his home state of Texas. In either of those cases, the
driver can’t really complain that it is unfair for the court to exercise jurisdiction over him. In each case, there is a sufficient connection between
the driver and the forum state (the state in which suit is brought) so that
it seems fair to make him defend an action brought in the forum state’s
court. It doesn’t seem unfair to require someone to litigate in a state in
which he is involved in an accident, and it certainly isn’t unfair to require
him to litigate in his home state. And, in each case, the forum state has
a legitimate interest in adjudicating the dispute. Oklahoma ought to be
able to try cases involving accidents on its highways, and Texas should
have the power to decide actions against its residents.
The Supreme Court distilled this sense of fairness into a constitutional
requirement in the case of International Shoe Company v. Washington
(1945). The due process clause of the Constitution limits the ability of
a state to exercise personal jurisdiction by requiring that the defendant
have “minimum contacts” with the forum state, so that requiring him
to defend there does not offend “traditional notions of fair play and
substantial justice.” (This really makes first-year law students crazy;
the court creates an intensely complicated body of law and ostensibly
grounds it in a concept like “fair play” that everyone should be able to
understand.)
The Litigation Process
105
The Robinsons attempted to sue the four Volkswagen defendants in
Oklahoma, but the Supreme Court said that an Oklahoma court could
properly assert jurisdiction only over the manufacturer, Audi, and not
the distributor or dealer, World-Wide and Seaway. Audi sells its cars in
a national market, so it has contacts with every state and should reasonably expect to be subject to a suit when one of its cars malfunctions
in any state. It obtains the benefits of doing business everywhere, so it
must accept the responsibility of being sued anywhere. World-Wide and
Seaway, however, sell cars only in the New York area. Although they
could foresee that some of their customers would drive to Oklahoma, it
would be constitutionally unfair to require them to go there to defend
suits in the absence of any other contacts between them and that state.
When Can You Make a Federal Case Out of It?
The Robinsons brought their case in the District Court in Creek County,
Oklahoma, part of the Oklahoma state court system, but they could
have “made a federal case out of it” by bringing suit in the federal courts.
The United States has a court system parallel to the state court systems.
Like most state systems, the federal judicial system has trial courts
(called the U.S. District Courts), intermediate appellate courts (called the
U.S. Courts of Appeals, or sometimes the Circuit Courts, from the days
when Supreme Court justices “rode circuit” to hold court in different
places), and a highest court (the U.S. Supreme Court). The system is
geographically organized, with, for example, a U.S. District Court for
the Northern District of Oklahoma and a U.S. Court of Appeals for the
Tenth Circuit, hearing cases from Oklahoma, Colorado, Kansas, New
Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming.
Although the federal court system looks pretty much like the state systems, on the issue of jurisdiction the systems are fundamentally different.
In the state courts, jurisdiction over the kind of case (subject matter
jurisdiction) is usually easy because the trial courts have general jurisdiction over most kinds of cases, but jurisdiction over the defendant
(personal jurisdiction) is subject to the constitutional limitation of sufficient contacts with the state such that it is fair to assert authority over
the defendant. In the federal courts it is just the opposite. Personal jurisdiction is unrestrained by constitutional due process requirements;
even though the district courts sit locally, they are all part of a national
system that can assert jurisdiction over defendants. (By court rule, however, federal district courts assert personal jurisdiction over defendants
only to the same extent as the courts of the states in which they sit.)
Subject matter jurisdiction is much trickier, though, because the federal
Law 101
106
courts are courts of limited jurisdiction; they have authority only to the
extent that the Constitution and the Congress have granted it to them.
So unlike the state courts, the federal courts only hear cases in particular
categories.
If each state has a judicial system, why do we need a set of federal
courts at all? The framers of the Constitution and the Congresses that
enacted enabling legislation had two reasons for establishing federal
courts. First, some cases involve important national issues that should
be decided by judges of the U.S. government rather than of any particular state. Second, Americans always have been a bit parochial, so
the framers wanted to provide a neutral forum for, say, New Yorkers
who had to litigate in Oklahoma. Each of those reasons resulted in a
particular kind of authority for the federal courts, known respectively
as federal question jurisdiction and diversity jurisdiction. (In addition,
there are a few other classes of cases given to the federal courts, such as
admiralty cases, which involve maritime affairs, and suits in which the
U.S. government is a party.)
The first type of federal subject matter jurisdiction is federal question
jurisdiction. Under the Constitution and statutes, the power of the federal courts extends to cases arising under the Constitution, federal statutes, and federal administrative rules. Federal courts hear cases involving
the whole range of federal law, including the environmental laws, Social
Security, Food and Drug Administration regulation, and violations of
constitutional rights. Sometimes, as with civil rights, the states also have
jurisdiction over these issues; a claim that a shopping mall is infringing
on free speech by preventing leafleting can be brought in state or federal
court. In other cases, the federal courts have exclusive jurisdiction; only
a federal court, for example, can hear a bankruptcy case or a patent
claim. The federal courts are believed to be in a better position than the
state courts to develop expertise, to make the law more uniform, and
to consider national interests in the interpretation and application of
federal law. In addition, many federal laws are unpopular when applied
to local controversies, and vesting federal courts with jurisdiction over
them makes it more likely that the laws will be enforced free of local
prejudice and political interference. Through the 1950s and 1960s, for
example, the federal courts were primarily responsible for enforcing civil
rights laws in recalcitrant Southern states.
Diversity jurisdiction is designed to prevent prejudice against out-ofstate litigants. The framers wanted to avoid bias by local judges and
juries against litigants coming from other states, or at least to allay the
fears of out-of-staters about the possibility of bias. Diversity jurisdiction
also permits many economically important cases—those involving large
The Litigation Process
107
commercial transactions between companies from different states, for
example—to be heard in the federal courts.
Where to sue initially is the plaintiff’s choice, but the concern for local
prejudice underlying diversity jurisdiction has historically been so great
that defendants are given a similar choice through a doctrine known as
removal. If the plaintiff brings the action in state court, an out-of-state
defendant can remove it to federal court, as long as the federal court
would have had jurisdiction in the first place. That way a New York defendant, for example, can avoid the prejudice that might result if sued by
an Oklahoman in an Oklahoma state court, by removing the case to the
U.S. District Court in Oklahoma.
The two traditional requirements for diversity jurisdiction are a sufficient amount of money at stake in the case and diversity of citizenship
between the parties. The amount in controversy requirement is a simple
one; the plaintiff’s claim has to be worth more than a minimum amount
set by Congress to be brought in federal court. The diversity of citizenship requirement is more interesting. In most cases, to establish federal
jurisdiction there must be complete diversity; that is, the plaintiff and the
defendant must be from different states, and if there is more than one
plaintiff or defendant, all of the plaintiffs must be from different states
than all of the defendants.
This is the key to the Robinsons’ case. The Robinsons claimed that
the gas tank on their Audi was defective and caused the fire that injured them, so they sued Audi and Volkswagen of America, the manufacturer and importer of the car. If the gas tank was defective, Audi
and Volkswagen were the ones responsible, and they certainly had the
assets to satisfy any judgment against them. So why did the Robinsons
also sue World-Wide Volkswagen, the regional distributor of Audis, and
Seaway Volkswagen, the dealer from whom they bought the car? The
answer is a strategic choice made by their lawyer using the law of diversity jurisdiction. The Robinsons had not completed their move from
New York to Arizona, so they were still citizens of their former home,
New York, for diversity purposes. Audi was a German company and
Volkswagen of America was a New Jersey corporation, but World-Wide
and Seaway were both New York corporations. Bringing them into the
case destroyed complete diversity, which meant that the case could not
be heard in federal court. Of all the possible forums—state and federal
courts in New York, Oklahoma, and possibly Arizona—the Robinsons’
lawyer decided the best place to sue was in state court in Creek County,
Oklahoma, then considered one of the most sympathetic jurisdictions
for personal injury plaintiffs in America. With World-Wide and Seaway
in the case, the defendants could not remove the case to federal court
Law 101
108
in Tulsa, which was much less attractive from the Robinsons’ point of
view.
Although the Robinsons’ lawyer made the correct calculation
about destroying diversity jurisdiction—an issue of subject matter
jurisdiction—he ran up against the law of personal jurisdiction. Seaway
and World-Wide challenged the ability of the Oklahoma state court
to assert jurisdiction over them, and the U.S. Supreme Court agreed,
holding that it would be unfair to force the New York distributor and
dealer to litigate in Oklahoma. With the New York defendants out of the
case there was complete diversity, so Audi and Volkswagen could and
did remove the case to federal court, where a jury found that the speed
of the car that struck the Robinsons’ Audi, and not a defect in the gas
tank, was the cause of the fire.
Cases like the Robinsons’ cause some critics to question whether diversity jurisdiction is still necessary or useful. Today, the critics argue,
diversity is more commonly used as a lawyer’s tactic than a protection
for out-of-state defendants. Local prejudice against out-of-staters has
declined to a considerable extent, so the value of fair process no longer
requires a neutral federal forum. Moreover, federal courts apply the same
substantive law as state courts and draw their judges and jurors from
about the same locales as the state courts, so the differences between
the two forums have diminished. We could, they say, eliminate diversity
jurisdiction and reduce the workload of the federal courts—though this
would, of course, increase the burden on the state courts.
As we can see from the Robinsons’ case, where a plaintiff can sue
and where he or she should sue often are two different questions. Under
the jurisdictional rules, a plaintiff may have a choice of courts: state or
federal, New York or Oklahoma. Choosing among those forums is a
strategic issue for the plaintiff’s lawyer. A  lawyer simply may choose
to litigate at home, in the jurisdiction where the plaintiff lives and the
lawyer practices, and the only decision to be made is state or federal
court. One court system may be more expeditious than another; in some
urban areas, the wait to go to trial may be six years in a state court and
two years in a federal court, or the difference may be as great in neighboring state jurisdictions. As with the Robinsons, the probable composition of the jury may differ from one court to another. The rules of civil
procedure may be more attractive for one reason or another; often the
federal discovery rules are broader and more efficient than comparable
state rules. The quality of the judges may differ as well; there is a traditional belief that federal judges are of higher quality, at least in some
respects, than state judges, and, again, judges in one jurisdiction may be
better regarded than those across the river or down the road.
The Litigation Process
109
If You Can Sue in Different Places, What Law Will Apply
in Each Place?
One consequence of having different state court systems and a parallel federal system is that different bodies of law potentially apply
to a single case. The Robinsons brought their case in Oklahoma state
court. If they had gone to federal court instead, would the federal
court have applied different law to determine if the Audi’s gas tank
was defective? Or if they sued in New York, would New York’s tort
law have applied to the case instead of Oklahoma’s law? Because the
law varies from place to place, issues like these often determine the
outcome of the case, so it is essential that civil procedure have ways
to resolve them.
Some kinds of conflict between the law in different jurisdictions are
easily resolved. Generally, a court applies its own rules of procedure,
whatever substantive law applies to the case. Also, when a state court
has a case involving federal law, it applies the federal law, including federal court decisions interpreting the law, because the Constitution makes
federal law “the supreme law of the land.” Conversely, a federal court
follows state law on all substantive issues. Therefore, a federal court in
a diversity case applies the same principles of tort law, contract law, and
so on as would be applied if the case were in state court.
A more complex kind of interjurisdictional conflict is between two
bodies of state law. Suppose Oklahoma holds manufacturers strictly liable for defects in their products but New York holds them liable only
when they have been negligent in making their products. (For more
on products liability, see Chapter  5.) Can the Robinsons avoid the
New York rule by suing in Oklahoma? This issue falls within the area of
law known as conflicts of law and requires a choice between the law of
competing jurisdictions.
The law of conflicts of law is among the messiest areas in the entire
body of the law. Its uncertainty tortures students, and its complexity
often baffles courts. The reasons for this confusion illustrates something
very basic about law.
Until about the middle of the twentieth century, the law of conflicts
of law was composed of what purported to be relatively clear rules
based on territorial notions of sovereignty and justice. For example, a
tort case would be governed by the law of the jurisdiction in which the
accident occurred; an accident in Oklahoma would be controlled by
Oklahoma tort law whether the case was tried there or in New York.
Similarly, a contract dispute would be governed by the law of the state
in which the contract was made. Unfortunately, many transactions have
Law 101
110
a multistate character. What law governs an action by the Robinsons,
who purchased a car in New York that was made in Germany and that
was involved in an accident in Oklahoma? Did the relevant wrongful
act occur when the car was made, sold, or burst into flames? Is it fair
to subject Audi to the tort rules of fifty different states, including some
states in which it may not even sell cars? Moreover, courts became
uneasy about applying the law of another state that conflicted with
their own rules. As the courts grappled with these issues, they created
counterrules and exceptions to the rules that generated confusion and
ultimately much criticism.
Judges and scholars were very successful in criticizing the old rules but
less successful in formulating new ones. The results in particular cases
have become unpredictable in many states, as courts abandon the old
rules in favor of flexible standards requiring them to weigh and balance
a multiplicity of factors. And many jurisdictions never came on board,
implicitly or explicitly clinging to the older rules. As a result, things are
different but not necessarily better.
The lesson from all this is that clear, rigid legal rules are often not what
they appear to be. They either produce injustice as they are applied to
varying fact situations or they demand interpretations and exceptions—
yet interpretations and exceptions cause complexity and uncertainty.
Broad, flexible legal rules, on the other hand, give the courts great discretion, and discretion produces conflicting decisions and uncertain rules,
which is another form of complexity and injustice.
How Does a Lawsuit Begin?
A lawyer begins a suit by preparing and filing with the court a document
known as a complaint in which, as its name suggests, the plaintiff (the
person who is suing) complains that the defendant (the person who is
being sued) violated his legal rights and asks the court for a remedy. (The
law doesn’t require that a lawyer file the complaint or otherwise represent the plaintiff. Anyone can represent himself—the term for this is pro
se, Latin meaning “for oneself.” As a practical matter, though, outside of
small claims court a lawyer is a necessity.) Attached to the complaint is
a summons, a document from the court that summons the defendant to
respond to the charges. The plaintiff must cause service of process on the
defendant by having a copy of the complaint and summons delivered to
the defendant by a sheriff, process server, or mail, depending on the rules
of the court in which the case is filed.
The complaint begins to define what the litigation is about. In the
Robinsons’ case, for example, the complaint would state
The Litigation Process
111
• who the Robinsons and the Audi defendants were,
• that the Robinsons had purchased an Audi from Seaway Volkswagen,
• how the Audi had been involved in an accident,
• how the Audi was defective,
• that the defect caused injuries to Kay Robinson and the children, and
• for those reasons, the Audi defendants ought to pay the
Robinsons money.
This information serves several purposes. First, it lays the basis for the
jurisdiction of the court. By stating that this case involves an automobile
accident that occurred in Oklahoma, the complaint makes clear that
the case can be brought in Oklahoma District Court. Second, it notifies
the defendants that they are being sued and why they are being sued.
Adequate notice to the defendants enables them to hire lawyers and to
begin to think about the basis on which they will contest the plaintiffs’
claims. Third, it frames the issues of fact and law that will be involved in
the case and, by implication, the issues that will not be involved. By going
through the elements of the cause of action—why the plaintiffs claim
they are entitled to relief because of what they allege the defendants did
wrong—the complaint tells the parties and the judge what will be relevant to the ultimate decision in the case. On the facts, for example, the
speed of the Robinsons’ car and the other car involved in the accident
will be relevant, because excessive speed rather than a defect in the Audi
may have caused the fire, so both parties may want to investigate and, at
trial, present proof about the speed of the cars. Whether the defendants
defrauded the Robinsons by advertising the car as having a high-fidelity
sound system when it actually had a cheap, tinny system is not relevant,
though, because that claim has nothing to do with the accident. The
parties should know not to investigate or present proof about the sound
system; if they try to do so anyway, the judge will know to stop them.
Traditionally, the complaint and other pleadings were the exclusive
means of defining the issues in the case for the parties and the court.
Judges required that a lawyer plead the facts underlying the claim specifically and precisely. If a lawyer failed to do so—if, for example, the
Robinsons’ lawyer misstated Audi’s corporate name or failed to specify
how exactly the defect occurred—the case would be thrown out of
court. Because this hypertechnicality conflicts with the goals of serving
Law 101
112
the values of the substantive law and providing fair process, judges have
relaxed the pleading requirements, and the process of defining the issues
in the case begins with the complaint but continues through the discovery and pretrial stages of the case.
As an illustration of this flexibility, if a lawyer makes a mistake in
pleading or discovers new information that reveals a pleading to be incomplete or incorrect, the court usually allows the pleading to be amended
to correct the error or account for the new information. The Robinsons
originally sued only Volkswagen of America, Seaway, and World-Wide,
but subsequently they amended their complaint to add Volkswagen AG,
the German corporation who they thought was the manufacturer; when
they learned through formal discovery that Audi AG, a different German
company, was really the manufacturer of the car, they amended again to
substitute Audi for Volkswagen. Indeed, the rules on amending pleadings
are so liberal that a party usually can amend at or after trial, so that the
pleadings match the proof presented at trial. As long as the defendant has
fair notice of the basics of the case, justice is served by focusing on the substance rather than the lawyer’s technical compliance with pleading rules.
This does not mean that there are no limits on pleading, however.
Everything in a pleading has to be grounded in fact and stated in good
faith, and, depending on the jurisdiction, either the party must swear to
its truthfulness or the attorney filing the pleading must sign it. The Federal
Rules, for instance, require an attorney to sign a pleading and attest to the
fact that she has concluded, after reasonable inquiry, that the pleading is
well grounded and that she is acting in good faith and without improper
motivations in filing the pleading. If a statement in a pleading is false or frivolous, the court can impose penalties on the party or on the attorney. The
vigorous application of rules such as this creates an incentive for attorneys
to be careful in drafting and investigating the accuracy of pleadings.
What Can the Defendant Do to Respond to a Lawsuit?
Someone first receives official notice that he is being sued by receiving
the plaintiff’s complaint and an accompanying summons from the court.
The summons typically directs the now-defendant to answer the complaint, but the defendant actually has a number of different ways of
responding to being sued.
First, the defendant can simply ignore the whole thing. If the defendant in a criminal case fails to answer a summons or appear for trial,
the police can go out and arrest her. Not so in a civil case. If World-Wide
Volkswagen receives the Robinsons’ complaint and summons in the mail
and doesn’t do anything in response, the police won’t come and drag the
The Litigation Process
113
company’s president into court. But that doesn’t mean that anyone can
just ignore a complaint. The sanction for failing to respond to the complaint is that the plaintiff can get the court to enter a default against the
defendant. A default prevents the defendant from subsequently entering
any defenses on the merits of the case, and the plaintiff can proceed to
get a default judgment that concludes the case against the defendant and
then can attempt to enforce it like any other judgment.
Sometimes a defendant may take the chance of ignoring a complaint
and having a default judgment entered against it because the defendant
doesn’t think the plaintiff will be willing or able to enforce the judgment.
Suppose the defect in the Audi had not caused serious injuries but had
required only a minor repair costing $200. If the Robinsons had for
some strange reason sued for this small amount, World-Wide might have
ignored the suit, figuring that either it wouldn’t be worth the money to
hire a lawyer in Oklahoma to defend a suit for such a small amount, or
the Robinsons wouldn’t bother to go to New York to try to collect it.
Ordinarily, though, if it is worthwhile for the plaintiff to sue, it is worthwhile for the defendant to respond, so the defendant will do something
other than ignore the complaint and risk a default.
The second tack the defendant can take is to raise an objection to
being sued that is unrelated to the merits of the case. The objection takes
the form of a motion to dismiss. A motion is a formal request to the
court, here to get rid of the case without ever reaching the substance of
what happened.
Some of these objections are trivial. A defendant can say that there
was a technical defect in the form of the summons or in the method of
service of process, sending the complaint and summons by mail, for example, when personal service is required. If the plaintiff can cure the defect, in this case by personally serving the defendant, then the objection
may delay the case but doesn’t halt it altogether. If the plaintiff cannot
cure the defect because the defendant is unavailable to be served, then
the defendant’s strategy may prevent the case from going forward at all.
A more important basis for a motion to dismiss is that the court lacks
jurisdiction over the defendant or the case. Recall that a court can render
a binding judgment only in a case where it has jurisdiction, or authority
over the subject matter of the case and over the parties. If the defendant
demonstrates that the court lacks jurisdiction, the court has no power
to do anything other than officially recognize its lack of jurisdiction by
dismissing the case. This is effectively what World-Wide Volkswagen
and Seaway Volkswagen sought in the Robinsons’ case. Arguing that
the Oklahoma state court had no personal jurisdiction over them because they had no contact with the state other than the fortuity that the
Law 101
114
Robinsons’ drove their car there, World-Wide and Seaway asked to be
let out of the case without having to defend on the merits.
The third move the defendant might make is to challenge the legal
sufficiency of the plaintiff’s complaint. This procedure was classically
known as a demurrer and is today more commonly referred to as a
motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim or failure to state a cause
of action. In such a motion to dismiss, the defendant argues that even if
all of the facts that the plaintiff alleges are true, there is no legal basis for
holding the defendant liable to the plaintiff. The motion therefore tests
the strength of the plaintiff’s legal argument without getting into the
facts underlying the dispute.
Suppose, for example, that Oklahoma tort law states that the manufacturer of a defective product is strictly liable to a consumer who is
injured by the product, but the distributor of a product who did not
manufacture it is not liable to the consumer. Seaway Volkswagen could
move to dismiss the Robinsons’ action against it for failure to state
a claim. Even if the Audi was defective and the defect contributed to
their injuries, under the law Seaway, the retail dealer, is not liable to
the Robinsons. Seaway is in the same position as if the Robinsons had
sued Ford or Google; whatever the facts of the case, the law provides no
remedy against this defendant.
If the defendant has no basis for making a motion to dismiss the complaint, or if any motions to dismiss fail, the defendant finally has to meet
the complaint on the merits of the case. The defendant does this by filing
a pleading called an answer, which, obviously, answers the allegations
made in the plaintiff’s complaint. The defendant can meet the plaintiff’s
allegations in three ways, by saying “no” (denying that the allegations
are true), “I don’t know” (disclaiming knowledge about the allegations),
or “yes, but” (admitting the allegations but stating facts that would provide a defense to the plaintiff’s claims).
Ideally, a defendant might like to deny everything the plaintiff said
in its complaint, thereby hiding all the information the defendant has
about the case and putting the plaintiff to the trouble of proving every
piece of information it needed to establish its claim. In former times
and in a few jurisdictions today, the defendant could accomplish that
through a general denial, which places into contention every allegation
in the complaint. Most courts no longer permit a general denial, though,
because in most cases it subverts the purposes of the pleadings and the
goals of the procedural system. The pleading process is designed to help
identify and narrow the issues that are in dispute. If the defendant,
through a general denial, controverts an allegation that it knows to be
true, an issue that could be excluded is raised unnecessarily. From the
The Litigation Process
115
system’s point of view this is inefficient and shows a discouraging lack
of candor.
Sometimes the defendant will admit that the essential elements of the
plaintiff’s complaint may be true, but the defendant will argue that the
complaint doesn’t tell the whole story. If so, in its answer, the plaintiff
can raise an affirmative defense. A defense introduces a new factor that
eliminates or reduces the defendant’s liability even if all of the elements
of the plaintiff’s claim are established. If, for example, the Robinsons’ accident had occurred ten years earlier, Audi could raise as an affirmative
defense the statute of limitations, which requires that suits be brought
within a prescribed time period.
Often the defendant doesn’t know whether some of the plaintiff’s
claims are true. When the Robinsons allege that they suffered serious
injuries in the crash and incurred large medical bills, Audi can neither
admit nor deny the claims, because it has not yet seen their medical
records. In that case, the rules of civil procedure permit the defendant
to say, in effect, “I don’t know.” This puts the issue into dispute and the
plaintiff has to come up with its proof. Of course, the desire to promote candor and to define the disputed issues through the pleadings
requires that the defendant really not know if the plaintiff’s allegation
is true, and courts often extend that requirement to force the defendant
to engage in a reasonable degree of investigation to ascertain the truth.
If, for example, the allegation concerns some facts about what the defendant itself did, the defendant cannot profess lack of knowledge; if the
Robinsons allege that an Audi brochure described the 100 LS as “the
safest car on the road,” Audi cannot disclaim knowledge of what was
in its own brochure when a simple check of its files would turn up the
truth. Once again, the goal of the process is to efficiently define what the
parties are really disputing about and what they can agree on.
What If There Are More Than Two Parties to a Lawsuit?
Usually we think of a lawsuit as involving two people, the plaintiff and
the defendant. But as we can see from the Robinsons’ suit, even an ordinary action may involve multiple parties—in that particular case, four
plaintiffs (Kay and Harry Robinson and their two children) and four
defendants (Audi, Volkswagen of America, World-Wide Volkswagen,
and Seaway Volkswagen). Moving from the paradigm of a bipolar suit
between two parties litigating a single issue to a more complex action
involving several parties and several issues presents a challenge for the
procedural system, but the way the system handles more complex cases
tells us a lot about modern civil procedure.
Law 101
116
A vague but effective principle governs courts’ ability to hear cases
involving multiple parties and multiple claims: A court has great discretion to do what is most consistent with substantive justice, fair process,
and efficiency. Often it is best to resolve a number of related disputes in
a single case, even if it involves bringing in other parties and different
claims. By doing so, the parties do not have to duplicate effort, waste
time, and risk inconsistent results by litigating the same or similar issues
over and over in different forums. At the same time, a court can separate
out issues or parties if bringing in other parties or claims would make
the case too confusing or create an undue risk of prejudice to someone.
Plaintiffs usually can sue together if their claims arise out of the
same events and involve common issues of law or fact. Harry and Kay
Robinson and their two children were all injured in the same accident,
so they brought suit in one action, represented by one lawyer. It would
be grossly inefficient and possibly unfair to require each of them to sue
Audi separately. Even if the plaintiffs don’t bring their actions together,
the court has the option of consolidating the actions on the defendant’s
request, or even on its own initiative. Eighteen thousand cases against
Eli Lilly & Co. arising out of problems with the antipsychotic drug
Zyprexa were consolidated in the federal court in Brooklyn; having all
the plaintiffs in one court facilitated settlement of the case. The courts
have considerable authority to try to work out an appropriate way of
dealing with these cases, even if they are filed in different courts.
Now think about the defendants’ side of the litigation. The Robinsons
sued Audi, the manufacturer; Volkswagen of America, the importer; WorldWide Volkswagen, the distributor; and Seaway Volkswagen, the dealer. The
same principle applies as with plaintiffs. Some or all of these defendants
are potentially liable because of the same set of events: the manufacture
and sale of an Audi with an allegedly defective gas tank that injured the
Robinsons in an accident. Because the trial will be pretty much the same
for all of the defendants, it is most efficient to have everything heard at
once. In fact, if the Robinsons had wanted to sue the driver of the car that
struck them, they could and probably would have brought that claim in
the same suit. In that case, however, not only would there be different evidence and argument about each of the defendants’ liability, but the claims
could vary as well. If the facts were different from those in the actual case,
by bringing suit the Robinsons could be saying that either the negligence of
the other driver caused the harm or a defect in their Audi caused the harm;
they are permitted to bring all the potentially liable defendants into court
and let the evidence fall where it may. (In the actual case they argued that
the other driver was negligent and that the defective gas tank made their
injuries more severe than they would have been otherwise.)
The Litigation Process
117
If a plaintiff chooses not to bring in all of the potentially liable parties,
the initial defendant may do so. Suppose the Robinsons for some reason
decided to sue only Seaway, the dealer from whom they brought the car.
Seaway could have impleaded Audi—brought Audi in as a defendant—
on the theory that either by contract or as a matter of law the manufacturer has to pay any damages for which the dealer is held liable due to
a product defect. Seaway could also have brought in the driver of the
other car, claiming that it was his negligence that was responsible for
some or all of the Robinsons’ injuries.
In addition to involving multiple parties, lawsuits often involve multiple claims. This is obviously the case when the Robinsons sue the Audi
defendants on a products liability theory and the other driver for negligence, but it can get even more complicated. One species of claim is
called a counterclaim, in which the defendant sues the plaintiff back.
If the driver of the other car was injured in the accident, when the
Robinsons sue him he will respond with a counterclaim against them,
alleging that their negligence was liable for his injuries. This is so obviously connected to their claim against him that the courts require him to
bring it in the same action; if he doesn’t, he cannot subsequently bring
a different suit for his injuries. In other cases the counterclaim is not so
intimately connected to the events at issue that it must be considered at
the same time, but the defendant may bring it because the parties are
in court and litigating anyway. Suppose immediately after the accident
Harry Robinson, not having been seriously injured, jumps out of his
car and shouts, “You maniac, look what you’ve done,” and punches the
other driver in the face. Either in the Robinsons’ suit or in a separate
suit, the other driver can bring a claim for battery for being punched.
Even though relatively little of the evidence overlaps their claim for the
accident and his claim for the punch, the counterclaim can be brought
in the original action. But because it would unduly complicate trials if
defendants had to bring as counterclaims all claims they might have
against the plaintiff, no matter how loosely related to the main event, the
driver can save his battery claim for another time.
One other type of claim occurs when defendants begin fighting among
themselves. Suppose that after the accident the Audi catches fire and
injures the Robinsons and the driver of the other car. The Robinsons
name Audi and the other driver as defendants in their action, saying that
the driver’s negligence caused the action and the product defect made it
worse. The driver may file a cross-claim against Audi, alleging that his
own injuries occurred because the defective Audi caught fire. The crossclaim is just like a new action except it is between defendants and can be
tried with the main action.
Law 101
118
What If There Are Many Parties to a Lawsuit?
Sometimes there are so many parties—usually on the plaintiff side, occasionally on the defendant side—involved in a single lawsuit that the
court treats them as a group rather than individually. This type of suit is
known as a class action, because the individual parties represent many
members of a class of people like them who are, as the law says, “similarly situated.” That is, the other class members share the same grievance.
Suppose that the Robinsons had financed the purchase of their car
through Volkswagen’s in-house finance company, they believe that the
finance company had overcharged them by miscalculating the interest
rate on the loan, and other customers of the finance company believe
they have been overcharged in the same way. If there are a hundred, a
thousand, or a million such cases, it may be more manageable to have
the cases tried as a class action in which the issue of overcharging can
be determined once for all the plaintiffs. In a class action, the Robinsons
can bring a class action on behalf of themselves and the other customers;
as class members, the other customers do not actually participate in the
conduct of the litigation and probably do not even know about it, but
they will be bound by its outcome.
The numbers involved in class actions range from the large to the
spectacular. A hog farm alleged to emit noxious odors was sued by a
class of 450 nearby property owners. Volkswagen’s falsified pollution
test results for its “clean diesel” cars resulted in a class action involving
475,000 vehicle owners. Five million merchants were in the class that
sued MasterCard and Visa for antitrust violations.
By allowing plaintiffs to bring class actions, courts attempt to balance
the conflicting goals of civil procedure. The ultimate goal, of course,
is to carry out the policies and values of the substantive rules of law.
Especially when many individual plaintiffs each have relatively small
claims, this can be done only through a class action. A borrower may
pay a few dollars more when the finance company miscalculates the
interest rate. Because of the small size of the claim and the expense of
litigation, it isn’t worthwhile for any one borrower to sue. The collective
loss of all borrowers, though, is very large. By bringing one suit for
all of the borrowers, a class action makes sure that the law against
misrepresenting interest rates is carried out and the people who are injured by the wrongful conduct are compensated.
Aggregating claims in a class action where it would be impracticable
to join all the claimants also serves the value of operating the litigation
system efficiently. A class action always involves at least one issue of law
or fact that is common to all the claims, such as whether the interest
The Litigation Process
119
rate was miscalculated. Examining and deciding that issue once is more
efficient than doing it over and over in different cases. Where the facts
or law applicable to each claimant differ too much, however, efficiency
is not served by a class action. Even if a thousand other Audis like the
Robinsons’ were involved in accidents in which a defective gas tank allegedly caused a fire following a crash, those cases would be less suitable
for class-action treatment because the evidence about the specific facts of
the accidents and the resulting injuries would be so different.
Because most class members do not participate in the litigation, class
actions also implicate special fairness concerns. All members of the
class will be bound by its result, so courts are required to give absent
class members adequate notice of what is happening, allow them the opportunity to opt out of the class action and sue on their own, and make
sure that the class representatives and their lawyers provide fair representation for the interests of the absent members.
Because of their massive scale and because the potential cost to the defendant of an adverse judgment is so great, class actions often are settled
rather than tried. Indeed, sometimes class actions are brought with the
purpose of being settled; the plaintiffs’ lawyers and the defendants will
negotiate and arrive at a settlement before or shortly after the case is
filed, without ever really expecting to go to trial. In these cases, the court
has a heightened obligation to scrutinize whether the case is appropriate
for a class action and whether the proposed settlement is fair.
The law on class actions is very complicated and hotly disputed. Some
courts seize on class actions as an effective means of disposing of large
numbers of claims in a relatively expeditious manner; even though a
class action can be complicated and cumbersome, it is still better than
thousands or tens of thousands of individual cases. Other courts are
more reluctant to use the device in very large cases, believing that the
farther away one goes from the traditional paradigm of adjudication—a
well-defined dispute between two adverse parties—the less well equipped
a court is to deal with the problem. And many businesses are hostile to
class actions, viewing them as a bludgeon used by plaintiffs’ lawyers to
coerce massive settlements and generate huge fees.
How Do the Parties Discover the Facts About Their Case?
This is handled through a process called, naturally enough, discovery.
It’s easy to find out some of what a party needs to know during litigation. The Robinsons, for example, know the speed at which they were
driving before the accident and how extensive their injuries were. Audi,
on the other hand, knows how the fuel tank was designed and built. But
Law 101
120
each of them wants information that the other has—the Robinsons want
to know about the fuel tank, and Audi wants to know about the accident
and the injuries.
It would be possible to proceed to trial without each party finding out
in advance what the other knows. That was the traditional common law
system, in which the facts were only minimally developed through the
pleadings and the parties had no other opportunity before trial to find
out what the other knew. But modern civil procedure uses a more open
system in which each party has an extensive opportunity to unearth all
of the facts relevant to the litigation during the pretrial stage of the litigation. To obtain information that is in the adversary’s possession, or
that can be most easily obtained from the adversary even though it may
be available elsewhere, a party can interview the other party under oath,
called a deposition; submit written questions, called interrogatories; demand that documents or other physical evidence be produced; require
the other party to submit to a physical examination; and ask the other
party to admit the truth of facts relevant to the litigation.
A deposition is an oral examination of the other party or someone
else with knowledge of the case. A deposition is like the examination of
a witness at trial in that it is conducted by an attorney, a verbatim record
is made, and the witness is under oath; the key differences are that the
examination is not conducted in front of a judge and there is no crossexamination. Instead, a court reporter swears in the witness and records
the testimony. By taking someone’s deposition, an attorney can find out
what that person knows in a flexible way; the answer to one question
may open up a new line of inquiry. If the witness might testify in an adverse way at trial, the deposition pins down the testimony, allowing the
attorney to develop contrary evidence or to use inconsistencies between
the deposition testimony and subsequent testimony at trial. It also gives
both attorneys a chance to assess how good the witness will be at trial—
not only what she says, but how persuasive or credible she is.
The disadvantage of taking depositions is the expense. In a typical deposition, the attorneys for both sides will be present, running up their fees,
and the court reporter must be paid, too. One way of reducing this cost is
to submit written questions (interrogatories), to be answered under oath.
All the attorney has to do is prepare and submit the interrogatories, not
be present at a deposition; therefore, interrogatories can be much cheaper,
especially because standard form interrogatories are often used for routine aspects of cases. No doubt Audi would submit to the Robinsons
standard interrogatories used in every personal injury case, asking them
to detail their injuries and medical treatment. Interrogatories also place
on the adversary the responsibility of ascertaining the facts needed to
The Litigation Process
121
respond to the questions posed. The disadvantage of interrogatories,
though, is that they are inflexible and not spontaneous. The answers
often are crafted by the attorney for the responding party to be responsive but not particularly forthcoming, cryptic, and narrowly drawn to
give no more information than is absolutely necessary. Nor can an attorney follow up on the answer to one question by asking another; the
attorney has to anticipate all the questions that might be asked and include them in the original set of interrogatories.
In connection with depositions or interrogatories, or in a separate request, one party can demand that the other produce documents or other
evidence. The Robinsons can ask for all engineering reports and test
results on the Audi’s fuel tank, and Audi can ask for the Robinsons’ medical records. Where someone’s physical or mental condition is at issue
in the case, one party can ask the court to require them to submit to a
medical examination. And a party must disclose whether it has retained
an expert to testify at trial and what the expert will testify about.
Finally, where one party believes that some facts are undisputed, that
party can request the other to admit that they are true, narrowing down
the issues to be tried. If Audi believes or has evidence to suggest that
Harry Robinson was driving too fast, its attorney might request that the
Robinsons admit that; if they know it to be true, they cannot deny that
he was speeding and must enter the admission. That might not conclude
the whole case—even though he was going too fast, the car still might
not have been crashworthy—but at least it removes one issue at trial.
Pretrial discovery has significant advantages over a system of trial by
surprise in achieving a fair and efficient process and in promoting the
values of the underlying substantive law. Simply at a practical level, it
focuses the recollection of witnesses at an early stage and preserves information that otherwise might not be available at the time of trial. Because
it typically takes years for a civil case to come to trial, witnesses may
forget details about events or may even die, and documents or other evidence may be lost or destroyed. Discovery comes well before trial, when
recollections are fresher and evidence is more likely to still be available.
More important, through discovery the parties learn the contours of
each others’ cases and clarify which issues actually are in controversy.
This helps the parties to prepare for trial and negotiate a settlement
because it narrows down what is involved in a case and gives them a
sense of the strength and weakness of each party’s position. By finding
out from the Robinsons that the accident occurred in a high-speed, rearend crash, the Audi defendants may conclude that they do not have
to invest resources in demonstrating the crashworthiness of the car in
a low-speed, head-on collision. Audi also may learn how serious the
Law 101
122
Robinsons’ injuries are, that Harry was not driving carelessly, and that
he would make a good witness at trial; those factors may convince Audi
that there is a good chance of losing a large judgment at trial, and this
might encourage them to settle the case. If they go to trial, the trial likely
will be fairer if both parties have an adequate opportunity to evaluate in
advance all of the relevant information.
Finally, discovery furthers the law’s substantive values by making it
possible to bring actions or assert defenses that could not be done in
the absence of full discovery and by allowing the parties to bring out all
of the evidence that might relate to the application of the relevant rules
of law. The Robinsons would never know or be able to prove that their
car’s gas tank was defective unless they had access to the design notes,
tests, and studies of Audi’s engineers, and Audi might never know if the
Robinsons contributed to the fire by carrying extra gas in cans in the
trunk. (One of the best examples of this function of discovery occurs
in medical malpractice cases. When a patient suffers harm as a result
of an operation, she would never know if the harm was caused by the
doctor’s negligence unless, through discovery, she could obtain the medical records and take the testimony of the doctors and nurses present in
the operating room.) Only when the parties discover and present at trial
all of the evidence that bears on the case can the relevant rules of law be
correctly applied.
These functions of discovery suggest that the scope of discovery—
what information parties can discover and what tools they can use to
obtain it—should be very broad, and in most court systems it is. The
scope of discovery is limited by countervailing factors, however, the
most important of which is the burden it can impose in time, inconvenience, and expense. Audi could overwhelm the Robinsons with detailed
interrogatories about every aspect of the accident, Harry’s driving record, their medical history, and so on and could compel each of them to
appear for several days of depositions and medical examinations. To
comply, they would have to consult their attorney, search their records,
take time off from work, and go to the office of Audi’s attorney to be
deposed. The Robinsons, on the other hand, could conduct a fishing expedition in Audi’s records. With little initial idea of what was wrong with
the car, they could ask for all design studies, tests, engineering reports,
complaints, and other documents potentially relevant, and Audi would
be required to search its files to respond fully.
Overdoing it in discovery is a real risk because discovery is part of
an adversarial process directed by the attorneys for each side. For the
most part, the parties can submit interrogatories, take depositions, and
request the production of documents without the court’s permission.
The Litigation Process
123
Because things can get out of hand, though, courts have imposed limits
and checks on the process.
First, the use of some discovery devices is limited by court rules.
Medical examinations, for example, intrude on a person’s privacy, so
they can be required only when someone’s medical condition is a major
issue in controversy. If the extent of Kay Robinson’s injuries are disputed,
she can be required to submit to an examination, but an eyewitness to
the accident could not be compelled to submit to an eye examination.
Other rules limit the number of interrogatories that can be submitted or
the number of depositions that can be taken without special permission
from the court.
Second (and paradoxically), some courts under the lead of the federal
system have opened up the discovery process. The Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure now require parties to automatically disclose much of the information they have that is relevant to the litigation, including the names
of persons having information and the issues that they know about,
a copy or description of relevant documents or property, the amount
claimed for damages and the evidence supporting the claim, and any
insurance policies covering the potential damages. Requiring the parties
to tell what they know at an early stage is designed to reduce the gamesmanship and burden associated with the discovery process.
Finally, even though most of the discovery process is driven by the
attorneys themselves, the trial judge has the power to supervise it. Some
devices, such as depositions above a stated number, may be used only
with the judge’s permission. And if one side objects to the other’s discovery tactics—such as the nature of the questions asked in a deposition,
the amount of requests for production made, or the proprietary nature
of the information requested—that side can appeal to the judge for an
order limiting the discovery.
What Else Happens Before the Trial?
Movies and television usually focus on the trial part of the litigation process. In fact, trials, in the relatively small proportion of cases in which
they occur at all, come only at the end of a long process. Discovery takes
up a large portion of the pretrial process, but the period before a case
comes to trial is also filled with legal and factual research, negotiations
between the parties, motions to the court on procedural or substantive
issues, and other proceedings to move the case along.
Sometimes, as we have seen, a case can be terminated before trial by
a dismissal—a decision by the court that even if the facts alleged are
true, the plaintiff does not have a legally recognized cause of action.
Law 101
124
That decision can be made on the pleadings alone. After the parties have
begun to amass evidence about the case through the discovery process, a
related event is known as summary judgment. (“Summary” in this sense
means without a full trial.) One party can get summary judgment when
the court determines that no facts are really in controversy (commonly
referred to as no genuine issues of material fact), and when the undisputed facts indicate clearly that one party should win as a matter of law.
The court can decide the whole case on summary judgment, ending the
case altogether, or only part of it, reducing the issues to be tried or taking
some party out of the case. In this way, the court can weed out cases and
issues that are sure to be unsuccessful at trial, eliminating much expense,
inconvenience, and delay; or, in the case of partial summary judgment, it
can narrow the issues and thereby simplify the trial.
During the time before trial, as elsewhere throughout the adversary
process, the parties play the dominant role in directing the litigation.
But the increasing presence in the judicial system of more complex cases,
expanded discovery, and the sheer bulk of litigation has caused judges
to take a more active role in managing the litigation in the interest of
promoting efficiency. Judicial management of the pretrial process takes
several forms. Court rules and practices frequently specify that the
attorneys must participate in a series of pretrial conferences designed
to assess the status of the case, decide preliminary matters, and generally move the case along. At an early stage the judge might hold a discovery conference in which everyone agrees on a plan for the schedule
and amount of discovery to be taken in the case. Closer to trial, many
courts require a pretrial conference between the attorneys, the judges,
and occasionally the principals in the case. Depending on the rules and
customs of the jurisdiction and the proclivities of the judge, the pretrial
conference may serve to finally prepare the case for trial, to encourage
the parties to settle, or both. At the conference the attorneys will try to
stipulate facts that are not in dispute, narrow down the issues remaining,
present lists of the witnesses they intend to call, and agree on a schedule
for the trial. If they cannot agree, the judge will decide those issues, and
the judge also will resolve pending motions on evidence, witnesses, and
other matters.
A major function of the pretrial process is to encourage the parties
to settle the case before it gets to trial. Especially in busy court systems,
where judges are under considerable pressure to conclude as many cases
as possible, the judge may use the pretrial conference as an occasion
to persuade, cajole, and pressure the attorneys to settle the case before trial. Many jurisdictions have instituted mandatory programs of
alternative dispute resolution. Before going to trial, either all cases or
The Litigation Process
125
cases below a certain dollar amount are referred for mediation, arbitration, or a mini-trial. These proceedings usually take place before a
single mediator, a panel of attorneys, a magistrate, or a judge. In arbitration, for example, the attorneys present abbreviated versions of their
cases and the arbitrators render a decision on who is liable and in what
amount. The arbitration is not binding, and therefore a party can still
opt to proceed to trial, but the process has a significant effect in keeping
cases from going that far. The arbitration gives the parties and their
lawyers an independent assessment of the strength and weaknesses of
their cases. The Robinsons may think they have an airtight case worth
millions, for example, but if the arbitrators find for the defendants, or
give the Robinsons only a small award, it may serve as a reality check
and deter them from proceeding to trial. Even if both parties don’t
accept the arbitration award, it may provide a reference point for settlement negotiations. And a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush;
the parties may prefer to take a somewhat unsatisfactory arbitrator’s
decision rather than wait what may be years to take the uncertain risk
of a trial.
With or without judicial intervention or formal alternative dispute
resolution, most cases that have made it this far—from half to threequarters, depending on the jurisdiction and the nature of the case—settle
before trial. In small cases the potential litigation costs are greater than
the likely return from pursuing the case to the end. If the Robinsons
were involved in just a fender bender, the other driver (or his insurance
company) would rather pay a small claim than pay their lawyers to try
the case. In larger cases, the uncertainty about how the case might come
out, the risk of losing big, and the delay and expense of going to trial
often favor taking a settlement rather than taking a chance at trial. Not
all cases settle, though. The lawyers may hold such differing views of
the case that they can’t agree on a settlement value. Or they may have
other objectives in mind; one party may want to establish a legal principle or may want to build its reputation for litigating to the bitter end,
as when an insurance company aggressively defends small cases to deter
policyholders from bringing future claims.
What Happens at Trial?
Television, movies, and news reports justifiably focus on trials as the
most exciting and important part of the litigation process. Even though
only a tiny fraction of civil cases ever go to trial, the trial is the central
event in litigation, looming over the rest of the system. And even though
its antecedents date back many centuries, to the time of the English king
Law 101
126
sitting in court dispensing justice, the modern trial is a unique American
institution.
Two key features control the trial process. First, the trial is the most
intense manifestation of the adversary system; the lawyers for the parties
shape the trial, and each side tries to do so in the way most favorable to
its position. Second, in most civil cases the parties can choose to have
the case tried before a jury; the importance of the jury is crucial for civil
procedure and even substantive law. Both of these features are controversial. A trial is supposed to be a search for truth, and an adversary
battle before an untutored jury may not be the best way to find the truth.
In thinking about what goes on at trial, an important issue is how we
balance the search for truth and the desire for efficiency with the historic
functions of the adversary system and the jury. (The trial as an adversary
proceeding is discussed in this section. The discussion of the jury follows
in a later section.)
No trial is typical. The trial of a tort claim arising out of a slip-andfall case or a contract case about a bank loan may involve only a few
witnesses and be over in half a day. A more complex products liability
dispute like the Robinsons’ or a securities fraud case might require many
witnesses, including experts, and last several weeks. The trial of some
extremely complex matters like an antitrust claim or a class action may
go on for months. Nevertheless, every trial has the same basic structure,
a structure determined by its adversary nature.
Consider what might have happened at the Robinsons’ trial. If the
parties choose to have their case tried by a jury, the first step is to select the jury. Once the jurors are seated and the judge has given them
an introduction to what will happen, the Robinsons’ attorney makes
an opening statement, explaining the case as he sees it: who the parties
are, how the accident happened, how seriously the Robinsons have
been injured, and why the Audi defendants are legally responsible.
Then the defendants’ lawyers will have their turn to lay out their view
of the case. In a case with multiple parties, all parties on one side
might be represented by one lawyer, as the Robinsons were, or each
party on a side might have its own lawyer. If Seaway Volkswagen
believes that its legal position may be different from that of Audi, it
may want its own lawyer; if that happens, each lawyer will have an
opportunity to open.
After the opening statements the plaintiffs begin presenting evidence
that supports their view of the case. (It is customary to talk about the
plaintiff and the defendant, but all of this is really done by their lawyers.)
The plaintiff always goes first because the plaintiff bears the burden of
proof. The burden of proof reflects a basic principle of law: Under our
The Litigation Process
127
system, no one is liable for anything unless there is a good reason to
hold that person liable. Suppose that after the parties present their evidence, the jury determines that the evidence is equally persuasive in
each direction; it is just as likely that the gas tank was defective as it is
that the tank was not defective. Who wins? The defendant wins because
the plaintiff has not met its burden of proof. The plaintiff must prove
its case by a preponderance of the evidence, so that the judge or jury is
persuaded that it is more likely than not—fifty percent plus one—that
the plaintiff’s version of the case is true. To impose legal liability on
someone, it is not enough that they might have violated a rule of law;
it must be probable—more likely than not—that they did so. (The preponderance of the evidence standard is much lower than the standard
of proof used in criminal cases; because the imposition of a criminal
penalty by the state is a more serious matter, criminal cases require the
higher burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt. See Chapter 9.)
After the plaintiff presents its evidence, it is the defendant’s turn. Like
the plaintiff’s lawyer, the defense lawyer calls and examines witnesses to
support its side of the case. When the defendant has finished, the plaintiff
may have a chance to present rebuttal witnesses, addressing issues raised
by the defense. When everyone has finished, each side makes a closing
statement to the jury, summing up its case. Then the judge instructs the
jury on the law, and the jury deliberates in private and returns its verdict.
In a bench trial (a trial to the judge without a jury), of course, the judge
does not need instructions on the law, and she may take some time instead of rendering her decision immediately.
The structure of the trial is relatively simple, but, as noted, conflicting
values govern the trial process. Consider how the adversary nature of the
trial may conflict with the search for truth and the desire to efficiently
move things along.
In an adversary trial, the lawyers for each side do more than simply
present evidence favorable to their client. Each lawyer—at least a good
lawyer—tries to use the whole trial, from the opening statement through
the examination of witnesses to the summation, to tell a coherent story
about the justice of her client’s claim on the facts and on the law. The
Robinsons’ lawyer paints a picture of a happy family moving to their
new home whose life was shattered because Audi’s engineers ignored
the obvious danger of the gas tank design to save a few dollars in the
production cost of the car; justice demands that the wrongdoers compensate their victims, meager though monetary compensation would be
for the physical and emotional pain they have suffered. Audi’s lawyer
recognizes the tragic nature of the accident (though they may describe
its consequences as much less severe than the Robinsons are making it
Law 101
128
out to be) but portrays how the engineers did the best that anyone could
in making the car safe; making Audi pay when it could not have done
anything better would just be looking for a deep pocket to pay for the
Robinsons’ loss.
Because the lawyers are adversaries in telling these two inconsistent
stories of what happened and what should follow from it, everything
that each of them does at trial is directed toward enhancing his own
story and discrediting the opponent’s story. The ethical rules that govern
attorneys’ conduct prohibit a lawyer from lying or knowingly instructing
a witness to testify falsely, but the same rules require that the attorney
be a zealous advocate for the client’s position. The lawyer will present
all of her evidence in the most favorable light, and she will attempt to
cast doubt on her opponent’s evidence. The attorney may also engage
in other forms of gamesmanship, such as wearing the right clothes to
make a favorable impression on the jury, making sure her clients and
witnesses act pathetic, sincere, honest, or whatever other role they have
been assigned in the story, interrupting her adversary’s questioning from
time to time just to disrupt his rhythm, and generally doing anything
within the bounds of the law and legal ethics to seek an advantage.
What Evidence Can Be Presented at Trial?
The presentation of proof at trial is governed both by the law of civil procedure and the law of evidence. Civil procedure controls the order and
method of presentation; evidence law determines what can be presented.
Most of the evidence at trial is presented through the testimony of
witnesses, pretty much as depicted on television shows. The witness is
sworn to tell the truth, the lawyer who called the witness asks a series of questions that guide the witness through her testimony, and the
other party’s lawyer can cross-examine, or ask other questions to test
the witness’s story. If one party’s lawyer objects to a question that has
been asked, she can ask the judge to prevent the witness from answering,
or exclude the answer if it already has been given. Witnesses ordinarily
testify from their own knowledge of the facts of the case, but expert
witnesses go beyond their own knowledge and give opinions on the ultimate issues in the case—whether there was a reasonable alternative design for the Audi’s gas tank, for example. Because of their unusual role,
expert witnesses have to be qualified and screened by the trial judge.
(For more on expert witnesses, see Chapter 5.)
The major difference between the presentation of evidence on television and in real courtrooms is the level of drama. Because of the
availability of discovery, the mundane nature of most cases, and the
The Litigation Process
129
requirements of the law of evidence, seldom does a witness suddenly
reveal a “smoking gun” piece of crucial evidence, break down in tears,
or confess to a crime. Most witness examinations are methodical, stepby-step recitations of detailed facts. Many people who watch real trials
on television or in person quickly become bored, as the attorneys use
a seemingly endless series of questions to establish all of the details of
a case.
In addition to witness testimony, the presentation of evidence at trial
may include the presentation of documents and physical evidence, such
as what is left of the Robinsons’ gas tank. Sometimes the attorneys or
witnesses, particularly expert witnesses, will enliven their testimony with
charts, drawings, models, computer animation, or videos in an attempt
to clarify their testimony, be more persuasive, and maintain the jury’s interest. The parties also may agree that some evidence is undisputed and
stipulate to it, so it can be summarized for the jury instead of having to
be presented by detailed witness testimony.
The law of evidence involves a balancing act. The court needs to allow
the parties to develop their own cases, bringing in all of the evidence that
might influence the judgment about what happened and how the case
should come out. But the court also wants to operate efficiently, focusing
on what is really important, and sometimes it wants to serve values other
than simple truth-seeking.
Because the court does not want to waste its time on matters that
don’t have anything to do with the decision of the case at hand under
the prevailing legal rules, the basic proposition of evidence law is that
only evidence that is helpful in establishing a legal proposition involved
in the case may be considered. This is the basis for the most common
objection to the introduction of evidence:  when one attorney claims
that something is irrelevant. If the Robinsons try to have an expert testify that an Audi gas tank will explode if you put a blowtorch to it, the
judge will exclude the evidence. Even though that evidence addresses
the condition of a gas tank, it does not help very much in determining
whether the gas tank was defective; any gas tank will explode if you
set fire to it, but the issue in the case is whether the gas tank was too
dangerous in a highway crash. Of course, Audi’s lawyer must object to
the evidence for the judge to exclude it; because the trial is essentially
an adversary process, the judge only rules on evidentiary issues raised
by the lawyers.
A similar principle motivates the other bit of evidence law many
people have heard about—the inadmissibility of hearsay. Hearsay evidence is second-hand testimony, or the introduction of an out-of-court
statement offered to prove the truth of the content of the statement. If
Law 101
130
the Robinsons can find a former Audi engineer to testify that he warned
the company that the gas tank was unsafe, that would be probative,
admissible evidence. But they can’t bring in someone else to testify that
she had sat behind the engineer on a bus and she heard him say that he
had warned the company; that would be inadmissible hearsay. Her testimony is not as reliable as the engineer’s, in part because Audi’s lawyer
would have no effective means of cross-examining her. If the engineer
was on the witness stand, Audi’s lawyer could ask who he told in the
company and what exactly he said, in order to prove that the warning
was not given to anyone who could do anything about it or that it was
unclear, but the witness who overheard the engineer cannot testify to
any of that.
In two circumstances, however, the law of evidence deliberately
excludes relevant, potentially useful evidence. The first instance concerns
evidence that may be more harmful than helpful in deciding the case. An
example is character evidence, which is defined broadly as any evidence
showing a person’s general tendency to act in a certain way. Suppose
some parts of Audi’s cars other than the gas tank on the 100 LS are
known to be poorly designed. The Robinsons certainly would like to introduce evidence of these other failures to suggest that Audi is a sloppy
manufacturer and that this pattern of conduct raises the inference that
they designed the gas tank on this car poorly, too. But the jury will not be
allowed to hear this evidence because the danger that they will assume
that Audi made a mistake here outweighs the value of the inference that
can be drawn from its past conduct.
The second basis for excluding evidence is when the use of the evidence
conflicts with some legal policy outside of evidence law. Here we clearly
sacrifice the search for truth at trial to some other value. For example,
privileged information is excluded. Audi may learn that Mrs. Robinson
told her husband and her lawyer that she was faking her injuries, but
they cannot call the husband or lawyer to testify to that statement. Even
though that would be persuasive evidence of malingering, we think it is
more important that people should be able to confide in their spouse and
their lawyer without fear that the confidences will be made public than
it is to get out all the facts in the course of litigation.
What About the Jury?
In addition to its adversary nature, the second key feature of the trial is
the role of the jury as the decision maker. The Seventh Amendment to
the U.S. Constitution and most state constitutions preserve the right to
a jury trial in civil cases. If both parties agree, a case may be decided by
The Litigation Process
131
the judge without a jury (called a bench trial), but in most cases, if either
party wants a jury trial, he or she is entitled to it.
Everyone recognizes that the jury is central to the litigation process, but it is also the most controversial element of the entire litigation
system. For some people it is a triumph of the democratic process, a bulwark of the people’s liberty, and an effective device for determining the
truth at trial; for others, it is an antiquated, inefficient institution that
only introduces arbitrariness, uncertainty, and delay into the system.
The unique attribute of the jury is that it is composed of amateurs.
Rather than have a highly trained, professional judge decide the
Robinsons’ case, we entrust that responsibility to a group of people who
know little about the law and nothing about the facts of the case other
than what they hear in the courtroom. This group must sift through
the conflicting evidence to decide what really happened, understand the
judge’s explanation of the law (which often involves subtle concepts
that baffle law students and divide judges), and put the facts and the
law together to reach a result that is both just and in accordance with
the law—all by unanimous or near-unanimous agreement. (In many
jurisdictions, the traditional requirement of a unanimous verdict by a
twelve-member jury has been reduced in favor of smaller juries—often
six—and nonunanimous verdicts—usually by a supermajority of twothirds or three-fourths.)
The jury’s job is to hear the evidence, decide what happened in the
case, listen to the judge’s instructions on the law, and apply the law to
the facts. In doing so, jurors bring to bear their own experiences, beliefs,
and values, making the decision process to a degree an expression of
community sentiment and not just a mechanical fact-finding process.
To serve these functions, juries should be representative and impartial.
To ensure that they are representative, the court constructs the list of
potential jurors from the rolls of registered voters, licensed drivers, and
other sources designed to draw in a large segment of the community.
Potential jurors are randomly summoned from this list to appear for jury
duty. Many people view jury service to be more of an inconvenience than
a civic responsibility and try to avoid serving, either by claiming a statutory excuse (often given to police officers, physicians, or the like), by
asking to be excused because of some hardship (caring for small children
or a sick relative, for example), or simply by not showing up. In the latter
circumstance, of course, the court may discourage that kind of behavior
by summoning the juror again or even issuing an arrest warrant.
More potential jurors are called than can be used on scheduled trials,
because many are winnowed out before the jury is seated. This process is
known as voir dire (the French legal term meaning “to speak the truth”),
Law 101
132
and it is designed to make sure that the jury is impartial. The judge or
the attorneys ask the jurors a series of questions, collectively and individually, to ferret out which potential jurors might have knowledge or
associations that might bias their judgment. In the Robinsons’ case, a
potential juror who knew the Robinsons or worked as an automotive
engineer might be challenged by one of the attorneys and excused by
the judge for cause, since there was an obvious reason why they might
not be impartial in deciding the case. Typically the attorneys also each
have some peremptory challenges that allow them to remove potential
jurors without giving a reason. Much attorney folklore governs the exercise of peremptory challenges—the idea that small business owners don’t
give large damage awards in personal injury cases, for example—and
recently the field has been taken over, at least in very important cases,
by jury consultants, psychologists, or other supposed experts who study
jurors’ backgrounds, body language, and responses in voir dire to advise
the attorneys on who would make a favorable or unfavorable juror in a
particular case.
After the jury has heard the evidence and been instructed on the law
by the judge, it retires to discuss the case (to deliberate) in secret. When
the jury reaches a decision, it returns to the courtroom to render a verdict. Unlike a judge, a jury does not give reasons for its verdict, although
sometimes the judge requires a special verdict, or responses to a series of questions about the case. (Was the gas tank defective? Was the
Robinsons’ car traveling at an excessive speed?)
The great question about the jury system is how well it works. Is the
jury an effective fact-finding and law-applying institution that brings
community sentiment to the process in a constructive way, or is it an
arbitrary, inefficient anachronism that too often makes bad decisions?
Because of the constitutional status of the civil jury right, the issue
cannot really be debated in terms of doing away with the jury altogether,
but it is played out in deciding how much power the law gives to the
judge to control the jury.
The judge controls the jury in four ways. First, the judge limits what
the jury can hear during the trial by applying the law of evidence
(discussed earlier). Second, the judge limits the issues that the jury can
consider; the usual formulation is that issues of law are for the judge to
decide and issues of fact are the jury’s responsibility. Third, the judge
tells the jury what rules of law to apply in deciding the case and what
those rules mean; the amateur jury has no way of knowing what the law
is, so it is supposed to follow the judge’s instructions. Fourth, the judge
can take the case away from the jury before it decides, or even upset the
jury’s verdict after it is rendered, by granting one of several motions for
The Litigation Process
133
either party. (The substantive law also controls the jury, of course. If the
jurisdiction has enacted a cap on damages for pain and suffering, for example, any award by the jury in excess of the cap will be reduced.)
The law–fact distinction seems as if it ought to be simple: The judge
has read the law books and is in the best position to determine what
rules apply and what they mean—the issues of law—and the jury figures
out what happened in the case—the issues of fact. The reality is more
complex. Labeling an issue as “law” or “fact” is simply a way for the
judge to determine which issues he is willing to allow the jury to decide.
Broadening the fact category expands the jury’s role, while broadening
the law category narrows it. If the judge thinks an issue is too complex,
very important, or potentially subject to misinterpretation, he will be
inclined to take it from the jury and preserve it for himself. As long as
the judge doesn’t go too far in usurping the constitutional function of
the jury, treating issues as matters of law is an effective jury control
mechanism.
In the Robinsons’ case, for example, determining whether Audi is liable involves issues of law and fact. Tort law frames the issues in this
way: whether Audi owed the plaintiffs a duty, what the content of that
duty was, and whether Audi breached the duty. The first two questions
involve important issues of social policy, so the court treats them as
matters of law. Whether Audi owes a passenger in one of its cars a duty
and how much of a duty are the basic issues of tort law; deciding these
questions has immense consequences for society at large. If Audi did not
owe a duty to passengers, it would have much less incentive to manufacture safe cars. Conversely, if it owed a duty to compensate people
who were upset by hearing about the accident on the television news, its
liability would be overwhelming. The content of its duty is equally important. One of the great debates in tort law has been whether the manufacturer of a product should be liable for all injuries caused by defects
in its products (called strict liability) or only where it has been careless
in manufacturing the product (where it has been negligent). The outcome of this debate is so important that the court in a products liability
case like this one will not let the jury resolve it. But the third question—
whether the car had a defect, assuming that Audi would be liable if the
car was defective—is different. This is by no means a simple question of
fact, because it requires the exercise of judgment about whether the risks
of the gas tank’s design outweigh its benefits, but it is much less important for the decision of other cases. The judge therefore will label the
breach of duty question as one of fact and leave it to the jury to decide.
If the jury’s function is limited to finding the facts and applying the
law to the facts, it must have some way of knowing what the law is and
Law 101
134
what they are supposed to do with it. At the end of the trial, the judge
tells the jury what issues it has to decide and what law it should apply
by giving instructions, or a charge. The judge explains, for example,
what standard of conduct the law requires of an automobile manufacturer in making its product safe, how to determine whether a design is
defective, for what kinds of damages Audi can be liable, how sure of
their conclusions the jurors must be before reaching a verdict, and how
they should conduct their deliberations. In most jurisdictions the courts
promulgate standard jury instructions for different types of cases, so
the judge doesn’t have to make them up each time. Typically, though,
each attorney also offers a set of proposed instructions, modifying the
standard instructions to fit the individual case, suggesting issues that
ought to be included or excluded, and shading the instructions to a particular view of the law. This is part of the adversary process, as each attorney tries to get the most advantageous instructions, and it is up to the
judge to decide what is appropriate.
Jury instructions are another point at which the limits of jury trials become contested. Even in a relatively routine case such as the Robinsons’,
the judge’s instructions can go on for an hour or more; in a complex
case, the instructions can take even longer. And the instructions are necessarily complicated, dealing with sophisticated legal issues and open
questions. It’s difficult for a nonprofessional juror to assimilate this recitation of rules that even lawyers and judges might find complex or consider highly debatable. Thus even though the lawyers and judge may
have spent hours carefully crafting each sentence of the instructions, the
jurors may be left with an impression or a few basic ideas that don’t accurately reflect the law they are supposed to apply.
The final method of jury control is one that goes to the heart of the
allocation of authority between judge and jury. At key points before,
during, or even after the trial, a party can ask the judge to take all or
part of the case away from the jury and decide it himself. We have already seen how the judge can prevent the case from going to trial by
granting a motion to dismiss the plaintiff’s case because it doesn’t state a
legally supportable claim against the defendant, or by granting a motion
for summary judgment because there are no major factual disputes and
the law determines how the case should be decided on the undisputed
facts. Once the trial has begun, the judge can also limit the jury’s power
and find for one of the parties by granting a motion for directed verdict
during the trial or a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict
after the jury has decided; the two motions often are referred to together
as motions for judgment as a matter of law. Or, at the end of the trial, the
judge can set aside the jury’s verdict and order that there be a new trial.
The Litigation Process
135
The motions for judgment as a matter of law may be granted if the
judge determines that there are insufficient facts to go to the jury or
that only one result reasonably could follow from the facts. The two
motions differ in their timing. A party may move for directed verdict
after its opponent has presented all of its evidence. After the Robinsons
conclude their case, Audi may move for a directed verdict in its favor if,
for example, the Robinsons have not presented any evidence that it was
possible to make a safer gas tank (if that is part of the legal standard),
or because all of the evidence they have presented indicates that the gas
tank was as safely designed as possible. Similarly, the Robinsons may
move for a directed verdict after Audi concludes its defense if Audi has
not successfully refuted their evidence that the gas tank was improperly designed. If either motion is granted, the court will enter judgment
for the successful party. (Even though it is called a motion for directed
verdict, the jury doesn’t have to go through the formality of actually
rendering the verdict that the judge directs them to—the judge does that
for them.)
Judgment notwithstanding the verdict is even more remarkable. The
presentation of evidence concludes, the judge instructs the jury and
sends it out to deliberate, and the jury returns with a verdict. But then
the judge concludes that the jury arrived at an answer that is wrong
on the law or unreasonable on the facts, so he declares one party the
winner notwithstanding the jury’s verdict in favor of the other party.
Procedurally, this motion is treated as if it were a delayed motion for
directed verdict, and the judge may use it because there is a tactical advantage to delaying his decision to take the case away from the jury. If it
is a close question and the judge grants a directed verdict, one party will
probably appeal and the appellate court might reverse the trial judge,
requiring a new trial. By waiting to see if the jury arrives at the “right”
answer, the judge may avoid the need for a second trial; a jury verdict is
more likely to be upheld than his grant of a motion.
Judgments as a matter of law present a striking conflict between the
jury’s central place in the trial process and the judge’s power to control
the jury. Because there were predecessors of these motions at the time of
the drafting of the Constitution, the Supreme Court has held that they
do not violate the Seventh Amendment right to a jury trial. Nevertheless,
because the device threatens the core of the jury’s function, courts have
taken some pains to try to define when such a motion might be appropriate, and different courts disagree on how much a trial judge can intrude into the jury’s domain.
Instead of entering judgment for one of the parties, the judge has the
option of ordering a new trial to correct errors that occurred in the first
Law 101
136
trial. Of course, an appeals court also can order a new trial, but the trial
judge knows firsthand what happened and, having the opportunity to
evaluate the trial, may decide that some individual error, or the accumulation of a number of smaller mistakes, prejudiced the opportunity
of the losing party to have a fair trial. Like motions for judgment as a
matter of law, granting a new trial can invade the jury’s province by
making their verdict ineffective. The new trial is less invasive, though,
because at least a second jury will get to hear the case. Nevertheless, new
trials are not granted just because the judge disagrees with the jury’s
verdict. If the judge has made a substantial legal error in conducting the
trial—improperly admitting or excluding important evidence or incorrectly instructing the jury, for example—he may correct the mistake by
ordering a new trial. Other reasons to grant a new trial include misconduct by an attorney or juror, newly discovered evidence, or because the
verdict is excessive. In the latter case the judge may offer the winning
party a choice: Accept a different amount or go to trial again.
What Happens After Trial?
The trial isn’t necessarily the end of the story. The losing party, or even
a party who wins only part of what it wanted, can appeal the case to a
higher court. Not every loser does appeal. The lawyer might decide that
there is not a good enough basis for appealing, or the party might be
unable or unwilling to invest more money in the litigation. But in every
jurisdiction, a losing party at least has the right to consider having the
case reviewed by an appellate court.
The larger court systems, like the federal courts and those of big states,
have two layers of appellate courts. The first layer is the intermediate
appellate court, called the Courts of Appeals in the federal system and
various names in different states. (Smaller jurisdictions omit this layer.)
The second layer is the highest court in the jurisdiction, such as the U.S.
Supreme Court or the Oklahoma Supreme Court. If the disappointed
litigant doesn’t like the result in the intermediate appellate court, she
may ask the highest court to hear the case. Usually, though, while the
appeal to the intermediate court is mandatory (the court must hear the
case), the appeal to the next level is discretionary (the court can decide
whether or not it wants to hear the case). In the U.S. Supreme Court, the
procedure of asking the court to hear the appeal is called petitioning for
a writ of certiorari (a Latin term meaning “to be informed”); by issuing
the writ, the higher court tells the lower court that it wishes to be informed about the case so that it can decide it. A court of last resort will
take only an appeal that seems important to it, either because the case
The Litigation Process
137
raises an important legal issue or because there is confusion among the
lower courts about the proper resolution of the legal issue involved.
The appeals process is not designed to achieve a correct result or to
guarantee a perfect process in the case. Instead, it tries to balance the fundamental values of the litigation process. An appellate court will correct
errors in the courts below that substantially impinge on the fairness of
the process or the effectuation of the values of substantive law that are
involved, but it tries to do this relatively efficiently, by not interfering too
much, causing undue delay, or preventing finality in the process.
Take as an example part of the appeal in the Robinsons’ case.
(Remember that there also were complex procedural issues in the case,
resulting in the case moving through the Oklahoma courts to the U.S.
Supreme Court and then up and down through the lower federal courts.)
The jury returned a verdict for the defendants and against the Robinsons
in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Oklahoma. The
Robinsons appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals, arguing in part that
the trial judge had improperly excluded evidence that Volkswagen, the
parent company, had known of the risks of the gas tank design. The trial
judge had excluded the evidence under the theory that the knowledge
could not be attributed to Audi, the manufacturer of the car and a subsidiary of Volkswagen. The court of appeals agreed that the knowledge
could not be attributed to Audi and affirmed that part of the judgment
but disagreed with the trial judge’s ruling that the evidence could not be
used against Volkswagen, so it sent the case back for a new trial against
Volkswagen.
First consider when someone can appeal from the trial court. Here
courts see the route to efficiency and finality in different ways. Most
courts observe the final judgment rule, which, as its name indicates,
permits the review only of actions of the lower court that are final, completely settling the matter before it. Under this approach, the Robinsons
cannot appeal the exclusion of the evidence of Volkswagen’s knowledge
of the defect at the time the trial judge makes his ruling; they have to
wait for the end of the case, when they have lost. This is seen as efficient because it prevents the Robinsons from delaying the trial while
they appeal, it allows the appellate court to look at the whole case at
once, including that particular error or any others alleged, and review of
the ruling might never be necessary; if the Robinsons win, the appellate
court will never have to consider the issue. Other courts allow an appeal
at any time when a substantial right is implicated in the trial judge’s decision. In this case, allowing an appeal of the evidentiary issue would have
made it unnecessary to complete the first trial only to have a new trial
ordered when the appellate court reversed.
Law 101
138
Next consider what the court of appeals did not do. Because the
appellate process follows the same adversary ideal as the rest of the
system, an appellate court will only answer questions that it is asked.
The court of appeals did not decide on its own whim that it wanted to
look at the Robinsons’ case after the trial court had finished; it had to
wait for one of the parties to appeal. And once it had the case, it only
could address issues that were brought to its attention by the parties and
that were raised in the court below. It did not, for example, consider
whether the jury instructions were proper, because neither party raised
that issue. Nor would the court consider an issue that the losing party
had failed to raise at trial. If the trial judge had admitted the disputed
evidence, Audi could not object to its admissibility for the first time on
appeal. As a matter of fairness and efficiency, the appellate court only
considers matters brought to the trial judge’s attention and developed in
the limited record that it has in front of it. Nor does the court consider
facts that were not brought before the lower court. And the court will
only consider issues on appeal that make a difference in the outcome of
the case. Audi, for example, could not appeal some ruling of the judge
just because it wanted to get a pronouncement from the higher court on
the law on that issue; Audi won, so the court won’t waste its time considering issues that are not important to the resolution of the live controversy. (Once the Robinsons appeal, however, Audi can raise other issues
in support of the judgment.)
Finally, think about how an appellate court reviews what happened
in the lower court. If the issue brought before it is a question of law, the
appeals court will usually be willing to use its own judgment as to the
correct result. The exclusion of the evidence of Volkswagen’s knowledge
turned on a principle of law about the relationship between parent and
subsidiary corporations. The appeals judges know that law as well as
the trial judge does, so they will consider the matter afresh and give no
deference to the trial judge’s ruling. (Because of their loftier position,
appeals court judges often think they know the law better. As the saying
goes about the justices of the Supreme Court, they are not final because
they are infallible, but they are infallible because they are final.) If the
issue is one that involves the facts, however, the appellate court will be
more circumspect. They see only a portion of the transcript of the proceedings in the lower court and the parties’ attorneys’ arguments. They
have not heard the witnesses or considered all of the evidence, so they
are in a weaker position to evaluate, say, whether the gas tank was defective. Accordingly, the appeals court will give more deference to a factual
determination, especially if it is made by a jury and not overturned by
the trial judge.
The Litigation Process
139
When all the appeals have been exhausted, the case is over. Even
though the losing party may discover new evidence or come up with a
new theory, it cannot go back to court and try again. Finality is an important element of the legal system, incorporated in the Latin phrase res
judicata—“the thing has been decided.”

5
Hot Coffee and Crashing Cars
Tort Law
Stella Liebeck, seventy-nine years old and a passenger in her nephew’s
car, bought a cup of coffee at the drive-through window of a McDonald’s
in Albuquerque, New Mexico. As she placed the cup between her legs
to remove the lid to add cream and sugar, she spilled the coffee, burning
herself. Liebeck sued McDonald’s, alleging that the coffee was too hot,
and a jury awarded her $160,000 to compensate her for her injuries and
$2.7 million to punish McDonald’s.
This is the most famous case of “lawsuit abuse” pointed to by
advocates of tort reform as they seek to revamp our system of civil liability, which is known as tort law. Everyone knows that coffee is hot, and
if you spill it, you can burn yourself. But no one is willing to accept the
consequences of an everyday accident, say tort reformers. Instead, judges
and juries have run amok in allowing plaintiffs to pass their misfortune
on to someone with a deep pocket.
Meanwhile, defenders of tort law view Liebeck’s case as evidence of
how well the tort system works. McDonald’s had received over 700
complaints about the temperature of the coffee it served and had settled
many of these complaints. The company served its coffee at a temperature twenty degrees hotter than its competitors, a temperature that its
managers admitted was too hot to drink right away and hot enough to
cause burns. Liebeck was in the hospital for a week with third-degree
burns requiring skin grafts. She initially was willing to settle the case
for her medical expenses, but McDonald’s refused. The jury figured that
$2.7 million was the amount McDonald’s made from two days of coffee
sales, so it used that amount as the punitive damage award. The jury also
found that Liebeck was partially responsible for her injuries because she
wasn’t careful, so it reduced the damages it awarded her accordingly, and
the trial judge further reduced the punitive damage award to $480,000.
Only after this case and the resulting publicity did McDonald’s reduce
Law 101
142
the temperature of its coffee. Here the tort system worked, its defenders
say; a wrongdoer was forced to compensate an injured victim and to
remedy its dangerous conduct. The case also influenced other potentially
dangerous conduct: The Wendy’s chain reduced the temperature of its
hot chocolate, served mostly to children.
For several hundred years, courts and legislatures have been working
out tort principles that determine when someone is responsible for
someone else’s injuries. Proponents of the tort system say that cases like
Stella Liebeck’s show how well the system works and that any change
ought to come through a continuation of the centuries-old process of
step-by-step development. Tort reformers argue that things have gone
too far, shifting responsibility away from individuals and imposing costs
on blameless defendants, so that drastic legislative changes are needed.
Before we can decide to either maintain or revamp the system, however,
we need to understand what tort law is all about.
What Is Tort Law?
Tort law is easy to describe at a general level and hard to define more
precisely. Tort comes from a Latin word meaning “twisted” or “turned
aside,” so a tort is an act that is turned aside from the standard of proper
conduct—a wrongful act. If you punch your neighbor in the nose, run
over a pedestrian by driving carelessly, or injure a customer by serving
burning hot coffee, you have committed a tort. (Some torts, not discussed
here, involve only economic harm and not physical injury, such as falsely
accusing someone of being a crook or using fraud to induce them to
enter into a financial transaction.) All of these are wrongful acts for
which the victim can receive an award of money damages.
We can get a good sense of what tort law is about from these typical
cases. Notice, however, that the descriptions are basically empty because
they do not answer the fundamental question about tort law: If tort law
sanctions wrongful conduct, how do we tell what conduct is wrongful?
Does your neighbor commit a tort when he punches you in the nose?
How about a driver who causes an accident while going under the speed
limit but arguably driving too fast for the weather conditions? Does
McDonald’s commit a tort when it serves coffee that is hot enough to
scald a customer?
Questions like these suggest two important features of tort law. First,
some cases are easy to decide and some cases are hard. Judges, lawyers,
and tort scholars use the easy cases to develop policies and principles
that help them analyze the hard cases. (Sometimes it works in reverse
as well; thinking about the hard cases provokes insights that make us
Tort Law
143
rethink our answers to the easy cases.) Second, tort law is as much a
process as it is a body of rules. An essential element of tort law is the application of very general principles—such as “everyone must use reasonable care not to injure someone else”—to particular cases, like an auto
accident that occurs on a rainy night. The institutional structure through
which the rules are applied—the litigation system in which responsibility
is shared by judges and juries—is as important in tort law as the content
of the rules themselves.
For a long time, the tort litigation system almost uniformly involved
cases brought by an individual plaintiff against an individual defendant
arising out of a single event. At most, small groups would be on one
side of the litigation or the other; the driver and three passengers in a
car would sue the driver of the other car who caused the accident, or
a patient injured during an operation would sue the surgeon, the anesthesiologist, and the hospital. Those types of cases still dominate tort
litigation, but in recent decades, cases involving many people injured by
the same conduct, known as mass torts, have become more important.
Some mass torts involve multiple injuries produced by a single accident,
such as an explosion, or a single source, such as pollution from a chemical plant. Others involve multiple injuries produced by the same kind of
conduct repeated over time, such as the use of asbestos or the sale of a
dangerous drug. The results, of either kind, are dramatic: 6,000 victims
of the September 11 tragedy, 13,000 cases involving the blood thinner
Xarelto, and more than 800,000 asbestos cases.
Mass torts present several challenges to the system. One challenge is
dealing with the sheer number of cases, which can move through the
tort system like a pig through a python, creating a bulge of litigation
that threatens to overwhelm the courts and delay the adjudication of
other cases. Another problem is parceling out justice to victims with
different injuries who sue at different times. Many defendants in mass
tort cases resort to bankruptcy to escape the burden of liability, and the
courts must then determine who gets what; if early plaintiffs are fully
compensated, there may be nothing left for those whose injuries manifest later. And toxic torts—mass torts arising from exposure to dangerous chemicals, drugs, or other substances—pose unusual causation
problems, because it may be difficult to tie the risk posed to particular
injuries, which may have complex origins and which may arise long after
exposure. Some of these problems are discussed in later sections of this
chapter. In responding to the question “what is tort law?”, however, the
presence of mass torts means that the answer includes both a process for
the adjudication of individual disputes and a system for addressing spectacularly large numbers of injuries as well.
Law 101
144
Why Do We Need Tort Law?
Injuries occur every day. A driver falls asleep at the wheel and crashes
into a tree. Someone trips down the steps. Surgical procedures are not
always successful.
Very often, though, people are injured when someone else is responsible. A homeowner fails to repair cracks in his sidewalk and a passerby
trips and falls. Physicians misdiagnose and mistreat patients. Passengers
are killed in an apparently minor car crash because the gas tank ruptures
and explodes. Or take one of the bizarre fact patterns that is a favorite
of torts teachers: A train conductor pushes a passenger, causing him to
drop a package; fireworks in the package explode, knocking over scales
which fall on another passenger waiting at the other end of the platform.
What if we had no legal system to deal with injuries like these?
First, people would have less incentive to avoid injuring other people.
Sometimes injuries would occur intentionally; more often, the injuries
would be accidental, because people would have less incentive to be
careful. An auto manufacturer would have an incentive to cut back on
safety measures if it knew it would not be liable for injuries that were
caused by defective cars. Property owners might be less inclined to repair their sidewalks. Conversely, businesses and individuals who did act
safely would be penalized for their good behavior because it is often
more expensive to act carefully with no corresponding reduction in
liability.
Second, the victims of accidents would be left to their own resources
to pay for medical expenses, lost wages, property damage, and other
consequences of injuries they suffer. For most victims the cost would be
significant; for the unlucky few, the cost would be catastrophic. Stella
Liebeck’s misadventure with hot coffee, for example, would cost her tens
of thousands of dollars in hospitalization and doctor bills.
Third, it just would not seem fair that people could freely inflict harm
on other people, either intentionally or carelessly. The careless driver
would get away with acting wrongfully if he did not have to pay for his
actions, and the innocent victim would have to suffer the consequences.
We could take care of these problems in several ways other than a tort
system. Wrongful behavior could be prosecuted criminally. Beefed-up
enforcement of the traffic laws could make sure people drove carefully.
Government bureaucracies could regulate in detail how cars and other
products are manufactured, how people have to maintain their property,
at what temperature coffee can be served in fast-food restaurants, and
so on. The market and general reputation would help, too; consumers
might only buy products that they knew to be safe, and people would
Tort Law
145
not want to be thought of as careless. Victims of accidents could purchase their own insurance. If they could not afford to do so, they could
be taken care of by government assistance or private charities.
In fact, we do use mechanisms other than tort law to take care of
the problems that arise from injuries. The threat of criminal prosecution discourages people from punching each other, and the federal government requires that cars have air bags, seat belts, and other safety
devices. Someone who is injured in a traffic accident may have medical
insurance to pay for his treatment and disability insurance to make up
for his lost income; if he doesn’t, Medicaid, Social Security, and welfare
payments may fill the gap. Some areas have been removed from the tort
system, substantially or altogether. Workers compensation is the largest;
in every state, workers who are injured in the course of their employment cannot sue their employers (with limited exceptions) but are instead covered by a state-run insurance program. Children who suffer
adverse reactions to childhood vaccines can seek compensation from a
federal trust fund instead of suing the manufacturer. After the September
11 disaster, Congress established an administrative procedure to compensate victims and their families as an alternative to suing the airlines
and airports for failing to protect against terrorism, and 97 percent of
the potential claimants were granted compensation.
Nevertheless, over several hundred years we also have developed a
system of tort law to address injuries and wrongdoing. Tort law provides
incentives for good conduct and disincentives for bad conduct, requires
that wrongdoers compensate their victims, and serves our sense of justice. These are the three principal purposes of tort law: deterrence or
incentives, compensation, and fairness. As a system for serving these
objectives and dealing with the problem of injury, the tort system has
three advantages over other mechanisms.
First, tort law permits private persons to take the lead in implementing
its policies. All torts cases are brought by private individuals or businesses,
not by the government acting as the prosecutor. (Sometimes the government is a party to tort cases, but then it is in the same position as any
other plaintiff or defendant.) The federal and state governments establish
court systems to referee disputes, but private parties drive the tort system
by their complaints and defenses. Moreover, the system is self-financing.
Plaintiffs’ lawyers take cases on a contingent fee basis, under which they
advance the costs of the litigation, their clients pay no fees up front,
and they take a portion of the recovery if they win and nothing if they
lose. Thus the tort system does not require a large prosecutor’s office or
administrative bureaucracy to formulate rules, investigate wrongdoing,
and pursue complaints. Instead, pursuing the public purposes of tort law
Law 101
146
is left in the hands of private persons. Stella Liebeck and McDonald’s,
for example, not the Food and Drug Administration or the Consumer
Products Safety Commission, drive the debate about how hot is too hot
for coffee.
Second, most of tort law is made up of relatively general rules, such as
a rule that an auto manufacturer has to make a car in such a way that
it does not contain a defect rendering it unreasonably dangerous. What
that means is fleshed out in the context of individual cases and can be
hotly contested, but it does not require the law to specify in advance, in
tedious detail, how a car must be built and what safety devices it must
contain. Regulatory agencies like the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration do some of this now, but without tort law they would
have to do much more. Indeed, because of the infinite ways in which
accidents can occur, it would be impossible to lay out prospectively how
someone must behave in every conceivable circumstance, and the generality of tort law enables us to evaluate behavior without having to do so.
Third, tort law links the deterrence and compensation policies to the
objective of fairness by requiring that the compensation to the victim
come from the wrongdoer. Once an injury has occurred, it seems right
that the wrongdoer should be made to pay and the victim should
be compensated. There is a neat symmetry to the mechanism that
accomplishes both objectives at the same time. If the wrongdoer is criminally prosecuted, the victim still bears her loss; if the victim has her bills
paid by insurance, her loss is compensated but the wrongdoer gets away
without taking responsibility.
Whether tort law works as it is supposed to is currently one of the
most controversial issues in the law. Businesses, doctors, and insurance
companies, arguing that tort law is out of whack, have joined under the
banner of tort reform to do away with some basic tort doctrines and cut
back on many others. Consumer groups and trial lawyers have defended
the system and argued for its expansion. Meanwhile, tort scholars from
the left and right sides of the political spectrum have analyzed and
debated the effectiveness of the system.
Tort reformers argue that the courts have gone overboard in serving
the compensation policy of tort law and have lost sight of fairness and
of the real-world consequences of their rulings. Increasingly, they assert,
the overwhelming impulse of courts in making tort rules and juries in
individual cases is to compensate the injured victim. In following this impulse, they have forgotten the need to prove the defendant was at fault
before imposing liability. Judges have created rules that do not require
a finding of fault before shifting the victim’s losses to the defendant.
Similarly, juries faced with a seriously injured individual and a defendant
Tort Law
147
who is a large corporation or a wealthy, well-insured doctor are not inclined to listen to explanations of the reasonableness of the defendant’s
conduct in their search for a deep pocket to pay the victim’s losses.
The consequence of these actions is a system of too much tort liability
and the ever-present threat of even more. This imposes a “tort tax” on
products and activities that raises the cost of many goods and services
and removes others from the market altogether. A car, a power tool, and
a ladder cost more because manufacturers are forced to include unnecessary safety devices or warnings. Physicians must practice defensive medicine by ordering additional tests that drive up the cost of health care, or
they leave high-risk specialties such as obstetrics altogether.
Tort reformers also argue that the expansion of tort liability
undermines personal responsibility. Because courts refuse to enforce
some agreements limiting or disclaiming tort liability, consumers are unable to exercise choice as to the level of safety they are willing to pay
for. More broadly, the increase in liability has contributed to a society in
which people do not feel responsible for their own actions and all look
for an excuse for their behavior and someone else to pay for their losses.
In the “sue ’em” society, no one has to bear the consequences of his or
her acts anymore. In response to these problems, tort reformers have
succeeded in enacting some changes and have proposed even more. The
goal, they say, is to restore balance to the system by making it harder for
injury victims to get to court, harder to win if they get there, and harder
to collect large damages if they do win.
Defenders of the tort system disagree with the tort reform diagnosis
and remedy. They point out that the system has been a great success in
improving the safety of the American people. Tort law has had a significant effect in providing incentives for safety, in areas from medical malpractice to the manufacture of defective products. The prospect of tort
liability, for example, encourages manufacturers to research the potential dangers of their products and to develop safer products. Many dangerous products either have been taken off the market, restricted in use,
or improved—examples include asbestos, children’s clothing that is not
flame-retardant, and cars that are not crashworthy. For many victims
of personal injury, tort law provides the only source of compensation.
While tort reformers repeat high-profile horror stories (only some of
which are accurately reported), the broader story of the success of tort
law has been less frequently told.
This success has been accomplished without juries going wild. In the
overwhelming majority of cases, lay juries agree with professional judges
about the outcome of cases and do not simply hunt for a deep pocket
to pay for the plaintiff’s loss. And the issue of personal responsibility is
Law 101
148
a complicated one; making the plaintiff assume liability for her conduct
is often achieved only by letting the defendant not bear responsibility
for his.
These are difficult issues to resolve, and they will be discussed more
as the chapter explores the substantive rules of tort law. But let’s take a
look at two stories to get started on the process.
Professor Peter Bell relates an anecdote that gives a perspective on how
businesses are affected by the presence of tort law. He tells of visiting
Niagara Falls and coming upon a cluster of wooden steps, platforms,
and bridges that allowed tourists to walk right down to the falls. When
his daughter asked, “Daddy, is it safe down there?” he had two conflicting reactions: On the one hand, the structure seemed too fragile, but
on the other hand, it had to be safe. His belief that it was safe did not
rest on the likelihood that some government agency had inspected the
steps, nor on the confidence that the owners would check them carefully because it was the right thing to do or would serve their business
interests. Instead, Bell reports, “What made me think the structure was
safe was my knowledge that the operators of the tour were aware that
if they did not make damn sure the thing was safe, they would get their
pants sued off.”
Second, think about the problem of drug safety. Pharmaceutical
manufacturers generally try to make safe drugs, because that is the
responsible thing to do and because it is good business. But they
are in business to make a profit, and that goal creates pressure to
put or keep a drug on the market even if there are questions about
its safety. The consumer’s next line of defense is the Food and Drug
Administration, which approves new drugs, requires warnings of potential risks, and orders products taken off the market when greater
risks become known. But there are major gaps in the FDA process.
At its best, the FDA relies on information from drug companies and
cannot adequately evaluate every product risk. At its worst, as law
professor and torts expert Carl Bogus wrote, a regulatory agency
such as the FDA can be “captured, exhausted, besieged, ossified, demoralized, co-opted, and starved,” subject to political influence and
control by the companies it is meant to regulate. Even FDA officials
concede the problem; Dr.  David Graham, associate director of the
FDA’s Office of Drug Safety, asserted that the FDA “is incapable
of protecting America.” When companies’ own incentives or FDA
regulations fail, tort law steps in to fill the gap. Tort law does not provide easy answers, however. Deciding whether a manufacturer should
be liable for making a dangerous drug involves balancing between
those who are harmed by the drug and those who are benefited by it
Tort Law
149
and evaluating what the manufacturer knew about the dangers, when
it knew it, and what it should have done.
Is It a Tort When You Hit Someone?
Tort law is divided into three categories: intentional torts, negligence,
and strict liability. An intentional tort is when the person causing the
harm meant to do so. Negligence involves carelessness. Strict liability
holds the actor responsible even though he did not mean to harm the
victim and exercised care in trying to avoid the harm. Of these, the easiest category to understand is intentional torts, where the prototypical
tort is known as battery.
When Biff punches George in the nose, pushes him down a flight of
stairs, or gleefully runs him over with his car, it constitutes the intentional tort of battery. Battery protects the integrity of a person’s body
against intentional invasions. Providing a remedy for battery serves the
policies of tort law. We want to deter Biff and people like him from
punching others, and if George has to go to the doctor because of his
injuries, it is fair that Biff compensate him for his loss.
Simple enough. But of course, the law is seldom that simple. Intentional
torts are wrongful because the tortfeasor intended to cause harm to the
victim. (Tortfeasor is an elegant legal term for someone who commits a
tort; substitute “wrongdoer” if you like.) But what does it mean to intend harm? And what kind of harm is required?
Consider the case of Garratt v. Dailey (1955) from the Washington
Supreme Court. Brian Dailey, a five-year-old boy, was visiting in the
backyard of Ruth Garratt, an older woman. Brian moved a lawn chair
that Ruth intended to sit in. When she tried to sit down, not noticing
that the chair was no longer there, she fell to the ground and fractured
her hip. The precise chain of events was in dispute. Ruth alleged that
Brian deliberately pulled the chair out from under her as she started to
sit down in it. The trial court found that Brian had picked up the chair,
moved it a few feet, and sat down. When he discovered that Ruth was
about to sit in the place where the chair had been, he hurriedly got
up and tried to put the chair back, but he was not in time to prevent
Ruth’s fall.
Take Ruth’s version of the events first. If Brian testifies that he didn’t
mean to hurt Ruth but only thought it would be funny to see her fall to
the ground, does he have sufficient intent to make him liable for a battery? In everyday language, Brian did not “intend” to cause the harm that
ultimately occurred—a broken hip. He didn’t mean for it to happen, but
from the law’s viewpoint, he still intended to cause an unlawful contact
Law 101
150
(having Ruth fall) that is sufficient for a battery. His motive—what kind
of harm he intended to accomplish—is irrelevant if he wanted to bring
about the contact.
Now take the court’s version of the events. Here Brian did not even
intend that Ruth fall, but he still might be liable. Under the law, a person
commits a battery either by purposely causing the harm or by acting
with substantial certainty that the harm will occur. If Brian knew for
sure (with substantial certainty) that Ruth would attempt to sit down
where the chair had been—because she just brought over a plate of food
and put it down on a picnic table in front of the chair, for example—the
intent requirement is satisfied. We want to discourage conduct that is
substantially certain to cause harm as much as conduct that is intended
to cause harm, and we want to compensate the victims of that harm to
the same extent; as between Brian and the injured Ruth Garratt, it is
fairer that he (or his parents) should bear the cost of her injury than that
she should.
The concept of harm is as broad as the concept of intent. A battery
is committed when someone intentionally causes harmful or offensive
contact. A broken hip from a fall or a bloody nose from a punch are
easy cases of harmful contact, but severe injury like that is not required.
A slight bruise or cut is more than enough.
The real expansion of liability for battery comes from the concept of
offensive contact. If Ruth falls to the ground and is not injured at all,
Brian still has committed a battery because the contact offends her dignity. When the law combines the concept of offensive contact with the
idea that the only intent required is the intent to cause such a contact,
it produces an expansive conception of battery. From the obvious case
of a punch in the nose the law inevitably moves to making judgments
about the appropriateness of all kinds of contact. If Joe gives Maria an
unwanted kiss as a sign of affection, it is a battery. Indeed, the conception of bodily integrity is so strong that Joe commits a battery even if he
kisses Maria while she is asleep and unaware of the kiss.
Not every intentionally harmful or offensive contact is battery, however. If the victim consents to the contact—if Maria consents to the
kiss—it is not battery. This makes sense in light of the goals of tort law.
We do not have the same interest in deterring harmful or offensive contact when the person agrees to the contact; he has, in effect, forfeited
his right of compensation. Nor would it be fair to impose liability on
someone who is only doing what another person has agreed to.
If someone consents to a certain bodily invasion, he does not necessarily consent to any bodily invasion, however. Professional football players consent to be hit in the course of a game, but they do not
Tort Law
151
necessarily consent to any act of violence. When Booby Clark of the
Cincinnati Bengals gave Dale Hackbart of the Denver Broncos a forearm
to the back of the head while Hackbart was kneeling on the ground after
a play was over, he may have acted so far outside the scope of the sport
that he committed a tort (Hackbart v. Cincinnati Bengals, Inc., 1979).
How is it determined whether consent has been manifested? Express
verbal consent to what would otherwise be a battery is not required.
Actions speak louder than words. By stepping onto the field, a football
player implicitly consents to being hit. But implicit consent can be difficult to determine, an issue that arises in cases involving alleged consent
to sexual contact, just as it does in the criminal law of rape. Consent
can be manifested by conduct as well as by words. The difficult issues
arise when there is a clash of perceptions about the presence and scope
of consent. When a woman acquiesces to a man’s sexual advances, is she
really consenting? In these cases, the court must define what constitutes
reasonable conduct in sexual situations by choosing between different
interpretations of events.
The hypotheticals from sports and sexual situations suggest something
else about intentional torts such as battery. These issues sharpen our understanding of the nature of tort law, but in practical terms, the tort of
battery is not used very much. Not many injured athletes or victims of
unwanted sexual contact bring civil suits against their injurers. Usually,
not enough money is at stake to make it worthwhile. Even when there is
the potential for recovery, the victim may not want to get involved in litigation for other reasons, such as its protracted nature and emotional toll.
Other intentional torts are used more often. One of the most commonly litigated is false imprisonment. This tort protects a person’s
freedom from movement in the same way that battery protects freedom
from bodily invasion. Locking someone in a room against her will is a
classic case of false imprisonment, as is threatening to injure her if she
leaves an unlocked room. Conduct like that should be deterred, and it
is unreasonable to expect the victim to risk bodily harm in resisting a
credible threat.
Many interesting false imprisonment cases arise when a customer
in a store is detained under suspicion of shoplifting. Consider Coblyn
v. Kennedy’s, Inc. (1971). Marius Coblyn, a seventy-year-old man, went
shopping at Kennedy’s, a store in Boston. While trying on a sport coat,
he removed the ascot he was wearing and placed it in his pocket. After
purchasing the sport coat and leaving it for alterations, and just prior
to exiting the store, he stopped, took the ascot out of his pocket, put it
around his neck, and knotted it. Just as he stepped out of the door, Goss,
a store employee, confronted him and said, “Stop. Where did you get that
Law 101
152
scarf?” Goss then grabbed his arm and said, “You better go back and see
the manager.” Eight or ten other people were standing around and were
staring at Coblyn, who agreed to return. As he and Goss went upstairs to
the second floor of the store, he paused twice because of chest and back
pains. After reaching the second floor, the salesman from whom he had
purchased the coat recognized him and confirmed that he had purchased
a sport coat and that the ascot belonged to him. As a result of the emotional upset caused by the incident, Coblyn was hospitalized and treated
for a heart problem.
Coblyn successfully sued for false imprisonment. Even though Coblyn
voluntarily returned to the store, Goss’s actions were sufficient for the
tort, which does not require that the defendant physically compel the
victim to remain. Massachusetts, like many states, has a shopkeeper’s
privilege statute under which a store owner may detain a customer in
a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time if there are adequate grounds to believe that the customer has stolen something. The
detention in Coblyn’s case was reasonably brief, but it was not in a reasonable manner; Goss failed to identify himself as a store employee and
unnecessarily grabbed the arm of an elderly man who showed no desire or ability to resist. Moreover, Goss had no reasonable grounds for
detaining Coblyn; merely stopping and putting on his ascot as he left the
store is insufficient evidence from which the reasonable person would
conclude that he had stolen it.
Is It a Tort When You Injure Someone by Not Being Careful?
Although intentional torts such as battery and false imprisonment have
the longest heritage and are the easiest to see as wrongful, the most
common torts involve harm caused by carelessness, not intentional harm.
This area of tort law is called negligence. When we say that someone
has been negligent, we mean that they have injured someone by failing
to act with reasonable care. The core idea of negligence is that people
should exercise reasonable care when they act by taking account of the
potential harm that they might foreseeably cause to other people. For
example, a driver is negligent in talking on his cell phone and letting his
attention drift from the road, causing an accident. A physician is negligent in misdiagnosing a patient’s illness because she fails to order tests
that are indicated by the patient’s symptoms.
The tort of negligence is about as easy to understand as intentional
torts such as battery. The defendant has acted wrongfully, not in meaning
to cause harm but in acting without sufficient concern for the interests of
others. We want to discourage that behavior and to encourage people to
Tort Law
153
act carefully. The injured victim has suffered a loss, and it seems fair that
the careless tortfeasor whose negligence caused the harm should bear the
burden of that loss.
Liability for negligence is narrower than liability for intentional torts,
however. Someone committing an intentional tort acts without justification; there is no legally justifiable reason to punch somebody in the
absence of consent or self-defense. But the defendant in a negligence
action is performing an activity—such as driving a car—that is basically acceptable and even useful. We just want to make sure that she
performs the activity reasonably—not perfectly, but reasonably—so liability is imposed only for violating the rules of the road, figuratively
and sometimes literally. Of course, putting a word like “reasonable” in a
legal rule invites endless controversy, and much of the law of negligence
is concerned with setting standards and devising a process to give content to the term.
In most everyday situations—driving a car, practicing medicine—
people have a duty to exercise reasonable care. There are a number of
traditional if controversial exceptions to the core idea of a duty of reasonable care. Each requires a judgment about whether it is good policy
to make someone liable to someone else if they act carelessly.
First, some classes of wrongdoers are simply immune from liability for some types of negligence (and often from other torts as
well, not just negligence). Historically the list of immunities was very
broad: Spouses could not sue each other, nor could children sue their
parents, charities could not be sued by the beneficiaries of their good
works, and the government was immune from suit as well—the king
could do no wrong. Immunities declined dramatically through the
course of the twentieth century, and today they generally remain in
two rough categories. For the federal government and most states,
governmental immunity has been abrogated only in part. Statutes define when and for what the government may be sued. For example, a
common exclusion is for a discretionary function; when the government does what only a government does, such as decide how many
police to put on the street, it cannot be sued for acting negligently in
making the decision. Otherwise, immunities and near immunities for
particular classes of defendants have become a staple of the tort reform agenda. After Chicago and other cities sued gun manufacturers
for flooding the market with guns that ended up in criminals’ hands,
Congress enacted the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act that
immunizes gun manufacturers and dealers from suits for criminals’ use
of their products. Similarly, after high-profile suits were filed against
McDonald’s, lobbyists persuaded legislatures to immunize restaurants
Law 101
154
and other food companies from suits claiming they contributed to the
national epidemic of obesity.
Second, the duty to prevent economic harm is much more limited than
the duty to prevent physical harm. If a driver carelessly causes an accident
that blocks the Lincoln Tunnel leading into New York, many people will
be late for work and have their wages docked, some sales representatives
will miss appointments and fail to close important deals, and the coffee
shops in Manhattan that sell coffee and donuts to arriving commuters
will lose business. The driver clearly has a duty of care to anyone physically injured in the accident, but is she also liable to all these people
who suffer only economic injury because of the same act of carelessness?
Generally not, because even though it is easily foreseeable that harm will
occur, the scope of the potential liability is too great.
In some cases, however, there is a duty to prevent economic harm. One
important class of cases involves large environmental disasters. When
the Deepwater Horizon oil drilling rig owned by Transocean and leased
to BP suffered an explosion that caused a blowout and spilled millions
of gallons of oil off the Gulf Coast, some shore property owners suffered
physical damage to their property when the oil washed ashore. Many
more people suffered economic harm without physical damage, though.
Fishermen couldn’t fish, boat rental agencies couldn’t rent their boats to
tourists, motorists paid higher gasoline prices, and so on. Courts have
to engage in tough line-drawing issues to determine to which of these
parties BP and Transocean owed a duty of care.
A third limitation is that the duty to protect against emotional harm
is less extensive than the duty to protect against physical injury. Upon
hearing that her child has been run over by a car and killed, a mother
suffers a severe emotional reaction that causes her to lose sleep, develop
an ulcer, and have painful headaches. Is the driver liable to the mother
for her suffering? (That is, did the driver owe a duty to the mother?) In a
series of cases, courts have imposed liability for causing emotional harm,
but they have also faced the difficulty of determining where to draw
the line. Does it matter if the mother is standing next to the child when
the accident occurs, sees it from across the street, or only hears about it
later? Some courts hold that the mother can recover only if she is in the
zone of danger within which she could have been physically injured as
well; others allow her to recover for observing the accident at the time it
happens but not if she hears about it subsequently. What if the mother
grieves for her child but has no physical symptoms? What if the plaintiff
is the child’s grandmother? Second cousin? Best friend?
Finally, the exception to the general duty of reasonable care that seems
most outrageous to the layperson states that a person has no duty to act
Tort Law
155
affirmatively to prevent harm that might befall another person. A man
sitting in a park, eating his lunch, watches as an unattended toddler
crawls toward an unfenced cliff. Is the man obligated to be a Good
Samaritan and get out of his chair, walk a few feet, and redirect the
toddler? The common law’s traditional answer is that he has no legal
duty to act in this case, so he is not liable for failing to exert what every
moral person would say is a reasonable effort to avert a tragedy.
The basis for this monstrous rule is twofold. First, the duty of reasonable care is imposed on those who enter into a course of conduct,
not those who refrain from acting altogether. The law avoids imposing
affirmative burdens on people—even modest burdens—because to do so
impinges on their personal liberty. The benefits of preventing harm and
compensating victims are outweighed by the unfairness of compelling
an uninvolved person to act. Second, once we start down the path of
imposing affirmative obligations, it is hard to know where to stop. (This
is what lawyers call a floodgates or slippery slope argument: By deciding
one case one way, we open the floodgates or start down the slippery
slope that makes us decide many other cases the same way.) If the man
sees that the fence around the cliff is broken but no toddler is in the area
yet, is he obligated to call the authorities to report the need for repair?
Is a strong swimmer required to go to the aid of a drowning child? How
about a swimmer of modest abilities?
Fortunately, the actual position of the law is less severe than it first
appears. Cases that involve a failure to act affirmatively are extremely
rare because the world is populated with Good Samaritans. And the
courts have fashioned exceptions to the rule. For example, when someone
has entered into a course of conduct, he may not abandon it and leave
someone else at peril. When two drinking buddies spend the evening together going from one bar to another, one of them can’t leave the other
unconscious, dangerously intoxicated, and lying in the street without
seeking aid. Likewise, a person who comes upon the scene of an accident
has no duty to stop and help direct traffic around the accident, but if she
starts directing traffic, she must be careful in doing so.
A related limitation on the duty of care is that a tortfeasor is liable
only to victims and for harm within the scope of the risk that made its
conduct negligent in the first place. For want of a nail the shoe was lost,
for want of a shoe the horse was lost, and so on up to the loss of the
kingdom. Is the negligent blacksmith liable in tort for the loss of the
kingdom? Courts have to draw the line at some point, holding that a
negligent defendant is not liable for consequences that are too remote.
This point was made in a favorite case of law professors, Palsgraf
v. Long Island Railroad Co. (1928), in an opinion authored by one of the
Law 101
156
great American judges, Benjamin Cardozo. Helen Palsgraf was waiting
for her train on the railroad platform after buying a ticket to go to the
beach. Another train arrived at the station, and two men ran to catch it.
One of the men, carrying a package, unsteadily jumped aboard the train.
A conductor on the train reached forward to pull him up while another
conductor on the platform pushed him from behind. The conductors’
pushing and pulling dislodged his package, causing it to fall on the rails.
The package contained fireworks that exploded upon impact. The shock
of the explosion knocked down some scales at the other end of the platform, which fell on the unlucky Palsgraf, injuring her.
Assume, as the court did, that the conductors were negligent in
pushing and pulling the passenger carrying the package. If he had fallen
from the train and been injured, the railroad unquestionably would have
been liable. (The railroad is responsible for the acts of its employees, the
conductors. This is called vicarious liability—liability through the acts of
another person for whom the defendant is responsible.) The conductors’
negligence also undoubtedly caused the injury to Palsgraf, so should the
railroad also be liable for her injuries? The only difference in the two
cases is that the harm to her occurred through an extended, bizarre set
of circumstances. The courts engage in line drawing to determine when
enough is enough.
What Does the Law Mean by Reasonable Care?
Oddly enough, unlike the definition of intent for intentional torts,
the definition of reasonable care in the law of negligence pretty much
follows the dictionary definition and ordinary understanding of “reasonable”: the degree of care that makes sense and that is prudent, enough
but not too much. In applying this definition, naturally, the courts tend
to complicate matters.
One of the best-known attempts to define reasonable care came in
the case of United States v.  Carroll Towing Co. (1947). Because the
defendants had negligently tied the Anna C, a barge, it broke free of its
moorings, rammed a tanker, filled with water, and sank. During these
events the “bargee,” the sailor in charge of the barge, was absent from
the Anna C. In the litigation concerning the property loss, the defendants
argued that the damages they owed should be reduced because it was
negligent of the bargee to leave the barge unattended.
Judge Learned Hand pointed out that there could be no rule prescribing
exactly when the bargee had to stay on the barge unless he could procure
a substitute. Sometimes it would be reasonable to leave the barge unattended and sometimes not:
Tort Law
157
Since there are occasions when every vessel will break free from her
moorings, and since, if she does, she becomes a menace to those
about her; the [bargee’s] duty, as in other similar situations, to
provide against resulting injuries is a function of three variables: (1)
The probability that she will break away; (2) the gravity of the
resulting injury, if she does; (3) the burden of adequate precautions.
Possibly it serves to bring this notion into relief to state it in
algebraic terms: if the probability be called P; the injury, L; and the
burden, B; liability depends upon whether B is less than L multiplied
by P: i.e., whether B < PL.
Thus whether there was negligence depends on the facts in a particular
case. If a storm is brewing and the harbor is busy, P and L are proportionately larger than if the weather is calm and the harbor is empty. In
the former case but not the latter, P times L will be higher than B, the
relatively small burden of having the bargee remain beyond his normal
working hours or get a substitute bargee.
In theory, the Hand formula can be applied to judge the reasonableness of conduct in any case. How much care is reasonable in the construction of a Little League baseball field, for example? Suppose the
builders of the field decide that a fence four feet high is high enough
in the outfield. Because the fence is 200 feet from home plate, only an
unusual Little Leaguer could hit the ball farther than that. If a ball does
clear the fence, it probably will fall harmlessly—although it might conceivably cause minor damage by breaking a window in a car parked
nearby. Stranger things might happen, however. A major league slugger
might take batting practice at the field and hit a dozen balls in a row out
of the park, or a ball might hit a pedestrian on a soft spot on her head,
causing serious injury or death. But all in all, the probability of harm
(P) is low, the likely injury (L) is also low, and the burden of preventing
harm (B)—by building a fence twelve or twenty feet high—is significant.
Now compare the Little League field to an ice hockey rink. The
builders of a hockey rink always put up shatterproof glass around the
ice to protect fans from flying pucks. Even though the cost of doing so
(B) is high, the probability that someone will be hit by a puck (P) and the
serious harm that might follow (L) are also high—much higher than the
product of P × L in the construction of a baseball field. Therefore, the
standard of reasonable care is higher for the builders of the rink.
The fundamental tort policies provide the logic behind the Hand formula. We want to encourage people to exercise caution, but how much?
If every Little League field had to have a twelve-foot fence, the cost of the
sport would rise significantly, perhaps even to the extent that it would be
Law 101
158
too expensive to continue. That doesn’t seem right. Someone might be
seriously hurt by a ball that sails over the fence, but that would be in the
category of freak accidents—something like being struck by lightning—
rather than a consequence of the carelessness by the builders of the field.
On the other hand, when a risk is foreseeable and significant, such as
being hit by a puck, we require the rink owner to protect against the risk
or pay the consequences.
The Hand formula expresses the factors to be taken into account in
determining if someone has been negligent, but it can’t reduce the decision about reasonable care to simple arithmetic. First, most of the time
people don’t think in algebraic terms. The driver of a car, for example,
does not usually calculate in any serious way the potential risks of her
action. Second, even if people did engage in rigorous analysis using the
Hand formula, they would find it difficult or impossible to attach figures
to the variables. In many cases, the probability of accident and the extent of resulting harm are uncertain because accidents can occur in all
sorts of ways. A pedestrian might get a bump on the head, or the ball
might break a window and a piece of flying glass lodge in someone’s eye.
Finally, in any of these cases, how do we measure the value of the injury?
Is the cost of medical treatment and lost wages an accurate measure
of someone’s injury, or do we have to take into account noneconomic
factors, like the fact that a person losing an eye will have more difficulty
playing tennis?
The Hand formula is at best a rough guideline and at worst misleading
in its apparent simplicity. The law has developed another yardstick for
measuring reasonable care that is more accessible to the normal layperson and to the average juror than the Hand formula: the reasonable
person. To exercise reasonable care, all you have to do is act the way
a reasonable person would act in the circumstances. Easy enough. But
using the reasonable person standard to define what constitutes reasonable care is putting the rabbit into the hat. The reasonable person is a
legal construct, not an empirical fact. In defining how the reasonable
person would act, courts weigh the same tort policies that they do in
applying the Hand formula or, for that matter, in determining whether
a duty exists in the first place. Nevertheless, the reasonable person is
omnipresent in the law of negligence, so it is useful to define his or her
qualities.
The reasonable person is not any particular person or an average
person. Instead, the reasonable person is the personification of the Hand
formula, a hypothetical and superior individual who acts the way everyone should act all of the time. The reasonable person always looks before he leaps, never pets a strange dog, waits for the airplane to come to
Tort Law
159
a complete stop at the gate before unbuckling his seatbelt, and otherwise
engages in the kind of cautious conduct that annoys the rest of us. As
one court put it, “This excellent but odious character stands like a monument in our Courts of Justice, vainly appealing to his fellow citizens to
order their lives after his own example.”
The reasonable person standard does give some latitude to real people
by considering the circumstances in which the defendant whose conduct
is being judged had to act. For example, the reasonable person is subject
to the same physical disabilities as the actual person. The conduct of a
blind person is judged according to the conduct of a reasonable blind
person, not a reasonable sighted person. A blind person is not unreasonable in failing to see and avoid an obstacle in her path, but she is unreasonable in attempting to drive a car.
However, the reasonable person does not suffer from the same mental
limitations as the defendant, as was established in the English case
Vaughan v. Menlove, back in 1837. Menlove, a hapless landowner, piled
hay in a dangerous manner that resulted in a fire. The fire spread and
damaged a neighbor’s property. Menlove argued that he used his best
judgment in stacking the hay, but his judgment just was not very good.
As his lawyer delicately put it, Menlove suffered from “the misfortune of
not possessing the highest order of intelligence.”
Too bad, said the court. The reasonable person standard means the
reasonable person of ordinary knowledge and intelligence. Perhaps
Menlove can’t be blamed morally, but he can still be held responsible
legally. By imposing liability the law encourages Menlove or others who
might be responsible for him to exercise more caution in the future,
maybe by not engaging in activities that pose a danger to others. If we
took into account Menlove’s dimwittedness, we would have to allow
for all sorts of shortcomings—bad driving, slow reflexes, and ignorance,
for instance. The result would be not one reasonable person standard,
but as many standards as there are defendants. In this type of case, what
happens throughout the law of negligence becomes very clear: We are
defining a legal standard based on how we choose to apply the tort
policies.
How Does a Plaintiff Prove That a Defendant Has Been Negligent?
In most cases a plaintiff tries to prove that a defendant has been negligent by using the same techniques that are used in any other trial (or
in drawing any conclusion outside of a trial, for that matter). Direct
evidence from eyewitnesses is the most compelling. The testimony of a
bystander who saw a driver taking swigs from a whiskey bottle, talking
Law 101
160
on a cell phone, and speeding through a stop sign just before the driver’s
car ran over a pedestrian provides overwhelming evidence of the driver’s
negligence. But circumstantial evidence—indirect evidence from which
the jury infers negligence—can be just as persuasive. If no one witnesses
the accident but the police find a half-empty whiskey bottle and a cell
phone with the connection still intact in the front seat of the car, the
driver’s blood alcohol reading is twice the legal limit for intoxication,
and an accident expert testifies that tire marks indicate the driver did not
brake before reaching the intersection, any jury would conclude that the
driver was negligent.
Some negligence cases require distinctive rules of proof. One set of
rules concerns the use of expert testimony. Ordinarily, it is the jury’s task
to decide the ultimate issue of whether the defendant acted negligently.
Witnesses provide evidence relevant to that conclusion, but the witnesses
are not allowed to suggest the conclusion to the jury. A police officer can
testify that she found the whiskey bottle and telephone in the car, but
she cannot then say that the defendant must have been driving carelessly.
Some issues are more complicated, however, and require expert testimony, including expert opinions about the defendant’s negligence, to aid
the jury in reaching its decision.
Expert testimony is most often used in medical malpractice cases. If
a surgeon leaves two clamps and three surgical sponges inside a patient
after an operation, it is easy for the jury to conclude that the surgeon
was negligent. Even though the jury may not know the precise procedure in the operating room to account for clamps and sponges before
closing up the patient, common sense dictates that there must be some
relatively simple means of preventing this kind of mistake. When the
victim alleges that a physician was negligent in diagnosing an illness or
carrying out a medical procedure, however, the jury needs help from
a medical expert to assess the claim. In the movie The Verdict, for example, Paul Newman’s client suffered brain damage because her doctors
had administered a general anesthetic too soon after she ate, causing her
to vomit into her anesthesia mask and stop breathing. In such a case, the
lay jurors do not know enough about reasonable medical practice concerning the administration of anesthesia to say whether the doctors had
been negligent, so they need an expert opinion to guide them.
Negligence is the failure to observe reasonable care, and since people
ordinarily act reasonably, the plaintiff or defendant may introduce evidence of a custom that is relevant to the issue of negligence. In one
New York case a tenant was badly cut when he fell through his shower
door, which was made of ordinary thin glass that easily broke, leaving
sharp edges. For at least ten years prior to the accident, landlords
Tort Law
161
routinely used shatterproof safety glass or plastic in shower doors to
prevent injuries like this. The custom of using safety glass was persuasive evidence for the jury of the landlord’s failure to act as the reasonable
landlord acts.
Does the reverse hold true as well? If the landlord proved that most
apartments do not have safety glass in the shower, does adherence to
that custom exonerate the landlord? Not necessarily. Custom is evidence
of reasonable conduct, but it does not define what is reasonable conduct. If the jury finds that a few landlords use safety glass, or even that
no landlords do but that safety glass is readily available at a cost that
is not too high considering the probability of accidents and their severity, it may conclude that adherence to the custom is unreasonable and
the landlord was negligent. The jury applies the Learned Hand formula
or the reasonable person standard on its own, and the custom is not
conclusive.
A statute can be even stronger evidence of negligence than a custom.
Suppose a driver traveling at 60 mph in a 35 mph zone strikes a pedestrian. The fact that the driver may have been going too fast suggests negligence, but the fact that the driver violated the legal speed limit is even
more compelling evidence of negligence. Courts often view statutes that
prescribe standards of conduct as statements of public policy that should
be recognized as defining reasonable care. The reasonable person does
not violate the law, so a lawbreaker is by definition acting unreasonably.
As usual, a clear rule like this needs some exceptions. If the driver was
rushing a desperately ill child to the hospital, for example, exceeding the
speed limit might be reasonable.
Once the plaintiff has proven that the defendant was careless, the
causal link between the defendant’s careless act and the plaintiff’s harm
is usually clear. A driver fails to stop at a red light and kills a pedestrian
who has entered the crosswalk; if the driver had not failed to stop, the
pedestrian would not have been killed. This is known as the but-for rule
of causation: A tortfeasor is liable if the victim would not have been injured but for the tortfeasor’s negligence.
But things can get more complicated. Suppose the pedestrian is
crossing eastward at a four-way intersection. Two drivers, one heading
north and one heading south, are each inattentive to the traffic lights;
they both drive through their respective red lights and converge on the
pedestrian at the same instant, crushing and killing her. (Read enough
torts cases and you will find that stranger things have happened.) Under
the but-for rule each driver escapes liability, because but for the negligence of the first driver, the pedestrian still would have been killed by the
second driver, and vice versa. But that seems like the wrong answer. Tort
Law 101
162
law wants to deter both drivers from running red lights, and the pedestrian is just as dead. It seems unfair that both drivers are let off the hook
and that the pedestrian’s heirs go uncompensated because of the fortuity
that each driver’s negligence coincided with the negligence of the other
driver. So the law adopts an alternative rule: If the tortfeasor’s negligence
fails the but-for test only because something else would have caused the
harm anyway, he still is liable.
In some cases, courts allow statistical evidence as the basis for liability. Scientific proof is never exact, but it is often the best we can
do. A chemical plant dumps toxic waste that pollutes a town’s water
supply; as a result, the incidence of an unusual type of cancer among
residents increases dramatically. How can a victim prove that her cancer
was caused by the toxic chemicals? If she proves that one person out
of a thousand normally develops this cancer but fifty people out of a
thousand in the town developed it, the court may conclude that proof
is sufficient. Similarly, if a physician misdiagnoses a patient and the patient dies, the patient’s heirs cannot prove absolutely that the physician’s
negligence caused the death, since the patient might have died even if he
had received the correct diagnosis and treatment; the best treatment may
not work in 100 percent of the cases. If the heirs prove that the doctor’s
negligence reduced the patient’s chance of survival from 80 percent to
20 percent, however, they probably have satisfied their burden of proof.
What if the Victim Is Partly at Fault for an Accident?
A pedestrian ignores a “Don’t Walk” sign and steps into an intersection
where she is struck by a car going 20 mph over the speed limit. The
driver was negligent in speeding and could have avoided the accident if
he had been going at a safe speed. But the pedestrian also was negligent
in not observing the sign, and her negligence contributed to her being
injured. If the pedestrian sues, can the driver use her negligence to cancel
out his negligence, so that he is not liable?
Tort law’s traditional answer was yes. Even if the defendant is negligent, the plaintiff’s contributory negligence prevents any recovery. The
reason for this answer was never quite clear. Surely we want to encourage
plaintiffs to act safely, and there is something unfair about forcing the
defendant to compensate the plaintiff for an injury that is partly her own
fault, but barring any recovery by the plaintiff may be too harsh. As a result, courts often limited the scope of the doctrine in one way or another.
The great majority of states have resolved this dilemma by abandoning
contributory negligence in favor of comparative negligence. Under comparative negligence, the plaintiff’s fault reduces but does not entirely
Tort Law
163
eliminate the defendant’s liability for the plaintiff’s injury. The jury is
assigned the task of quantifying the degree of fault, and the damages
are based on the numbers they come up with. If the speeding driver is
80 percent responsible for the accident, the driver pays 80 percent of the
damages and the pedestrian is left to bear 20 percent of the cost. Or if
the inattentive pedestrian is hit by two speeding drivers, each of whom
is equally responsible, they each pay 40 percent and she pays 20 percent.
In the McDonald’s coffee case, the jury decided that the plaintiff, Stella
Liebeck, was 20 percent responsible for the accident because she wasn’t
careful enough in taking the lid off the coffee cup, so it reduced her compensatory damages from $200,000 to $160,000.
Comparative negligence has a pleasing symmetry about it, but the devil
is in the details. The jury must quantify the unquantifiable, attaching
precise numbers to a messy set of facts. Then the court must figure out
what to do with the numbers. If the jury determines that the pedestrian is 51 percent responsible and the driver 49 percent, should she be
barred from collecting anything because she is more at fault than he is?
Suppose it is 50–50? How about if there are two drivers, each of whom
is 30 percent at fault, and the pedestrian is 40 percent at fault? Then the
pedestrian is more responsible than either of them separately but less responsible than both of them together.
States have adopted different rules of comparative negligence to take
account of these possibilities. The basic split is between a pure comparative negligence system, under which the plaintiff can always recover some
amount, even if the defendant is only 1 percent responsible, and various
modified comparative negligence systems, under which the plaintiff can
only recover if she is not as (50 percent) or more (51 percent) responsible
than the defendant.
One other situation involving the plaintiff’s contribution to the harm
arises when the plaintiff engages in assumption of the risk of harm. If
you go whitewater rafting, skiing, or skydiving, or even if you join a
health club with workout equipment, you will be required to sign a release acknowledging that the sport has certain inherent dangers and
absolving the owner or instructor of liability if you are injured. Are
these releases, also called disclaimers, enforceable? Agreeing to assume
a risk is just like agreeing to play a risky sport, which constitutes consent to injuries incurred along the way. Releases also reduce the cost
of providing some activities, and without them, these activities might
no longer be offered; a ski area that had to pay for all injuries on the
slopes might be put out of business. But releases threaten to undermine
the tort policies of incentives for safe conduct and compensation of the
injured, and we suspect that people often do not really know or think
Law 101
164
about the consequences of releases when they enter into them or may
not have much choice in the matter. Courts attempt to balance these
considerations. A disclaimer of liability for an essential service is generally unenforceable; you cannot effectively agree not to sue your doctor
if he injures you through his negligence. Liability releases in recreational
activities like rafting, in which people do not have to participate unless
they are willing to assume the risk, are more likely to be enforceable.
Even there, however, a court will scrutinize a release to make sure that
it brought home to the consumer the risk being assumed; a release prepared by a skydiving school by which a participant agreed to “waive any
and all claims . . . for any personal injuries” was held not to bar a suit for
negligence because it did not specifically mention negligence.
Assumption of the risk can be implicit as well as express. In a famous
New York case, Murphy was injured when he fell while on a ride known
as “The Flopper” at the amusement park at Coney Island. The Flopper
was a moving belt angling upward on which passengers attempted to
stand. Many of the riders, like Murphy, were unable to stand and were
thrown back onto the padded floor or walls. The obvious fun of the ride,
of course, apparent from its name and from simple observation, was to
be thrown and see others thrown. Although Murphy signed no release,
he took his chances by implicitly assuming the risk of injury.
If Someone Does Not Intend to Injure Someone Else and Acts With
Reasonable Care, Can He or She Still Be Liable in Tort?
Absolutely. The third major area of tort liability, along with intentional
torts and negligence, is strict liability—liability that is imposed even
in the absence of intent to injure or negligence. Some activities are socially beneficial but are likely to cause harm even if they are carried out
with reasonable care. When building a highway through a hilly area,
the construction company needs to use explosives and the explosions
might result in projectiles that damage nearby property. Even though the
company places the charges carefully, it seems fair that the cost of the
damage to the property should be shared by everyone who benefits from
the highway, by imposing the cost on the company rather than have it be
borne solely by the unfortunate owner of the nearby property.
One of the earliest strict liability cases was Rylands v. Fletcher, decided by the House of Lords in 1868. The defendants, mill owners, had
built a reservoir on their property. Unbeknownst to them, the reservoir
was built on top of an abandoned coal mine. The water in the reservoir
broke through the abandoned mine and flooded the connecting mine
of an adjoining landowner. Because the defendants did not know or
Tort Law
165
have reason to know of the abandoned mine, they were not negligent in
locating the reservoir where they did. But, the court said, some activities,
like building a reservoir to hold a large quantity of water, are abnormally dangerous even if they are performed with due care. The activity
is not so dangerous that it is illegal, but it is sufficiently dangerous that
we make the actor liable without fault for all damages that flow from it.
This encourages a heightened degree of care, and it imposes on the actor
the duty to pay all of the costs associated with the activity. Accordingly,
the defendants in Rylands v. Fletcher were liable even though they acted
with reasonable care.
Strict liability is imposed especially for activities that are not only dangerous but are unusual for their locale. Consider the collection of water,
as in Rylands v. Fletcher. A suburban homeowner who builds a small
decorative pond as part of his garden will not be strictly liable if water
escapes and floods his neighbor’s basement (although he may be liable
in negligence if he has not taken reasonable care to prevent the escape of
the water). Collecting such a small body of water to decorate a garden
is not unusual in the suburbs and not particularly dangerous. But the
homeowner who builds a massive irrigation system to water her small
suburban garden will be strictly liable; the irrigation system that would
be appropriate and common in a rural area is out of place and excessively dangerous in a suburban development.
The problem, of course, is drawing the line. Holding water in a small,
decorative pond in a suburban development is not abnormally dangerous; keeping a massive quantity of water in an irrigation system is
abnormally dangerous. Keeping a cocker spaniel, no; keeping a lion, yes.
How about a pit bull? A python?
When Is a Manufacturer Liable for Injuries Caused by Its Products?
Strict liability also is sometimes applied to impose liability on
manufacturers of defective products that cause injury—what lawyers
call products liability. The expansion of products liability was one of the
great success stories of tort law in the twentieth century. Perhaps because
of that success, it is also the area in which large corporations, insurance
companies, and their lawyers have mounted one of the strongest attacks
on the tort system. Today there is great debate about the extent to which
products liability is or should be strict liability, some version of negligence, or a mixture of the two.
Begin with one of the landmark cases in the law of products liability.
Gladys Escola, a waitress in a restaurant, was moving glass Coca-Cola
bottles from their case to a refrigerator when one exploded in her hand.
Law 101
166
Escola said that the bottle “made a sound similar to an electric light bulb
that would have dropped. It made a loud pop.” The bottle broke into two
jagged pieces and inflicted a deep, five-inch cut on Escola, severing blood
vessels, nerves, and muscles in her thumb and the palm of her hand.
If this case is governed by the ordinary rules of negligence, Escola has
to prove that the bottling company failed to exercise reasonable care
to prevent the explosion of the bottle that injured her. To establish the
bottler’s lack of reasonable care, Escola must prove two things:  first,
that there was something wrong with the bottle, either that there was a
defect in the bottle itself or that it was filled at too high a pressure; and
second, that the bottler acted carelessly in producing or failing to detect
the problem, by, for example, buying an inferior grade of bottle, failing
to inspect bottles properly, or not operating its filling machines correctly.
Both of these can be hard to prove.
To prove that there was something wrong with the bottle, Escola
first has to have the bottle, or what is left of it after the explosion. In
many cases this will be a problem; in the actual case, someone swept
up the pieces of the bottle and threw them away. Even if she has the
pieces, it may be impossible to identify the cause of the accident from
the fragments that remain.
Suppose, though, that Escola gets over the first hurdle and is able to
determine that there was a defect in the bottle that caused the explosion. She still must prove that the bottling company was negligent in
producing or failing to discover the defect. The bottling company will
argue that it buys its bottles from a reputable manufacturer, organizes its
production line in as careful a manner as other bottlers, uses high quality
equipment, trains its workers, and inspects the bottles at appropriate
points—that is, that it acts reasonably. The bottler may even concede
that there may have been a defect in the bottle. There may be statistics
showing that one out of 100,000 bottles will explode. But that is not the
bottler’s fault. As long as it has acted carefully, it is not liable under a
rule of negligence.
At this point we might say the tort system has done its best and that
Escola just has to suffer her loss in silence. Someone who focuses narrowly on identifiable fault as the exclusive basis of liability is inclined
to stop there. The courts that developed the law of products liability,
however, thought they could do better and so created the doctrine of
strict products liability. The manufacturer is liable for marketing a defective product without any requirement that the plaintiff prove its negligence in doing so. The key to products liability is that the product is
in “a defective condition unreasonably dangerous,” to quote the awkwardly phrased but widely adopted formulation of the rule. A  bottle
Tort Law
167
that explodes is in a defective condition (something must be wrong with
an exploding bottle) and unreasonably dangerous (the explosion might
injure someone). Whether the unreasonably dangerous, defective condition was caused by negligent filling or a negligent failure to inspect
during manufacture or was unpreventable doesn’t matter. The bottler is
strictly liable—liable even if it cannot be proven negligent.
The courts developed strict products liability for four basic reasons.
First, in many cases the defect in a product is caused by the manufacturer’s
negligence but the negligence is difficult or impossible to prove. The physical evidence may be destroyed or inconclusive, or the information about
the manufacturing process that is required to prove negligence may be
uniquely within the control of the manufacturer. Second, negligence liability alone provides insufficient incentives to induce manufacturers to
make safe products. When considering how much to invest in careful
product design, manufacture, and quality control, a manufacturer should
calculate the full cost of injuries caused by its products and figure those
damages into the cost of the product. Imposing strict liability encourages
manufacturers to go the extra mile to produce safer products, and in
many cases, manufacturers are in a better position to minimize injuries
than are the users of the products. Third, manufacturers typically represent their products to be safe, and the expectations of consumers created
by those representations should be protected. Fourth, even if the manufacturer has acted reasonably, the victim of the product accident is still
injured. If the cost of the injury is shifted to the manufacturer, the manufacturer will in turn distribute the loss among all of its customers. The
cost of each product increases slightly so that each purchaser is in effect
buying insurance against being the unlucky product user who otherwise
would suffer a catastrophic loss. This form of loss distribution through
strict liability is not simply a question of finding a “deep pocket,” or
someone who has enough money to bear the plaintiff’s loss; instead, it
makes the product bear its true cost, including the cost of the injuries it
produces, and distributes the cost among all users of the product.
Strict products liability, therefore, is widely imposed for manufacturing
defects, as when a Coke bottle is improperly made. Products can be defective in two other ways as well: when the product has a design defect
and when the manufacturer fails to warn about a risk created by the
product. The expansion of strict liability to these types of defects has
been more controversial. From the 1960s into the 1980s, most courts
adopted strict liability for design defects and sometimes for warning
defects as well. Since then, there has been a more conservative reaction leading to a cutback in strict liability in favor of a narrower, negligence rule, such that a leading torts textbook captions its discussion of
Law 101
168
the subject “Development, Rationales, and Decline of Strict Products
Liability.”
A product has a manufacturing defect when it is not made the way it
is supposed to be. With a design defect, by contrast, the product is made
exactly as the manufacturer intended, but the problem is with the design of the product itself. This is the most controversial area of products
liability, and the debate over the scope of liability plays out in defining
the test for a design defect. Is a product defectively designed if it is more
dangerous than users of the product ordinarily expect it to be (called
the consumer expectations test)? Is it defectively designed if the dangers
created by its design outweigh the benefits of the design (called the riskutility test)? If the latter, how do we weigh the dangers and the benefits?
Under the consumer expectations test, a product has a design defect and strict liability is imposed on its manufacturer if the product is
more dangerous than would be expected by the ordinary consumer. The
widely followed Restatement (Second) of Torts endorsed the consumer
expectations test, imposing liability when a product is “dangerous to an
extent beyond that which would be contemplated by the ordinary consumer who purchases it, with the ordinary knowledge common to the
community as to its characteristics.” But courts found that the consumer
expectations test by itself is not enough to evaluate defective designs;
in many cases, for example, particularly involving complex products,
consumers had no fixed expectations of safety. Therefore, the risk-utility
test developed as an additional or alternative standard.
The risk-utility test balances the costs and benefits of the product. In
determining whether a product is defectively designed under the riskutility test, the court weighs the risks that the product poses to users
against the benefits of the product to users and society at large. If the
risks outweigh the benefits, the product is defective and the manufacturer is liable for the harm the product causes.
As it developed, the risk-utility test moved away from strict liability
and became more like negligence. Courts that favor negligence treat the
test very much like the Learned Hand formula for negligence, require the
victim to prove that the harm produced by the product is greater than
its utility, and sometimes also require that the victim demonstrate that
there was a reasonable alternative design of the product that would have
prevented the accident.
In weighing the risks and benefits of the design of a product, a manufacturer has to consider all of the normal uses of a product. This rule has
produced a number of interesting cases involving the crashworthiness of
cars. Drivers certainly don’t want to be involved in accidents, but everybody knows that sooner or later many cars will crash. In designing cars,
Tort Law
169
manufacturers have to recognize this fact and make a car that is to some
degree crashworthy. Today many crash safety features, such as seat belts,
airbags, and reinforced frames, are required by government regulations,
but the need for them was first highlighted by products liability litigation
and consumer advocates.
Most commonly, the risks of a product outweigh its utility when there
is either an alternative design of the product or an alternative product
that reduces the risks while providing much or all of the same benefits.
One of the pathbreaking cases for products liability, Greenman v. Yuba
Power Products (1963), illustrates a defect when there is an alternative
design. Greenman, a home woodworker, received a Shopsmith from his
wife for Christmas. The Shopsmith was a combination power tool that
could be used as a saw, drill, and wood lathe. While he was working on
a piece of wood on the Shopsmith, it suddenly flew out of the tool and
struck him on the forehead, inflicting serious injuries. Greenman’s expert testified that the Shopsmith was defective in using inadequate set
screws to hold parts of the machine together, so that normal vibration
loosened the screws, causing the part of the machine holding the wood
in place to move out of position, allowing the wood to fly off. In the
expert’s opinion, the manufacturer could have used stronger screws or
other, better ways of fastening the parts of the machine together to prevent this kind of accident. Because there was a readily available alternative design, the risk of making the machine this way (the possibility of
injury) outweighed the benefit of doing so (the slight reduction in cost).
Many other products that have been involved in products liability litigation are defective because there is an alternative design of the product
that serves the same purpose with less risk. Nightgowns and pajamas not
treated with a flame retardant are defective relative to the slightly more
expensive, treated garment, for example. An automobile with a gas tank
situated where it will leak easily in a minor accident is too dangerous
because the cost of prevention through relocating or lining the tank is
relatively small.
Sometimes a product is defective because there is an alternative
product that provides similar benefits at less risk. A famous example of
this type involved the Dalkon Shield contraceptive device. The Dalkon
Shield was an intrauterine device (IUD) that was highly effective as a
contraceptive but had the tragic side effect of dramatically increasing
the incidence of pelvic diseases among woman who used it. Even if the
Dalkon Shield could not be redesigned to avoid this problem without
losing its basic function, there are many other effective contraceptives
available, so the risk of using the IUD far outweighed the benefits provided by it when considered in light of the available alternatives.
Law 101
170
Determining whether there is an alternative design of a product or alternative product that functions as a substitute at less risk is not always
easy. Large, heavy SUVs are safer in crashes than tiny subcompact cars
simply because of their greater mass, but that doesn’t mean that every
vehicle has to be built like a behemoth; the tradeoff of a modest reduction in safety for a much cheaper price seems like a reasonable one. But
what about a toy gun that shoots hard pellets at high speed—is a Nerf
gun that shoots soft foam pellets a reasonable substitute or is the loss of
realism too great a tradeoff?
The third type of product defect involves a failure to warn about
the dangers of a product or how it can be used safely that renders the
product unreasonably dangerous. Excessive warnings supposedly caused
by the threat of litigation have become a staple butt of tort reform
jokes: the label on a children’s scooter that warned “This product moves
when used,” or the warning on an electric blender to “Never remove
food or other items from the blades while the product is operating.” In
fact, manufacturers are not required to warn of obvious dangers—that
scooters move, for example. But manufacturers do have to warn about
foreseeable risks of a product that can be reduced or avoided if a reasonable warning is provided, where the failure to warn renders the product
not reasonably safe. That way, a consumer can choose whether to use
the product at all and, if so, can use it more safely.
A warning cannot always cure a design defect in a product. A label
warning the operator of an industrial machine not to put his hands in
the machine is not sufficient when the machine could easily be designed
with a safety guard. But a product is not necessarily defectively designed
because it is dangerous; instead, the danger may require a warning to
render the product reasonably safe. Some products are defective because
the manufacturer does not adequately warn of the risks of the product, as
when the manufacturer of a household cleaning product does not warn
users that it is caustic and might cause skin damage. Other products are
defective because the manufacturer fails to provide proper instructions
as to their use, as when a manufacturer does not warn that combining
different household cleaners may produce toxic fumes.
The warning communicated to the user of a product must be reasonable in content, form, and location. In a particularly tragic case, Coy
Carruth bought a Pittway smoke detector that failed to sound an alarm
in a fire in which seven of his family members perished, arguably because
the smoke detector was improperly placed. The box contained a picture
of a smoke detector installed where the wall and ceiling met, but a more
detailed explanation about not placing detectors in such “dead air”
spaces was included in a pamphlet inside the box, buried among seven
Tort Law
171
pages of fine print with no prominent warning of the danger. Given the
obscurity of the warning, a jury reasonably could find that the warning
given was inadequate given the risk (Carruth v. Pittway, 1994).
A traditional exception to the duty to warn concerns prescription
drugs. Under the learned intermediary rule, the warning is properly
directed to the patient’s doctor—the learned intermediary—who is in the
best position to evaluate the information and assess the risks and benefits
of the product. In many jurisdictions, however, there are exceptions for
mass inoculations, such as flu vaccine, and for oral contraceptives. There
the patient exercises more choice in the process of choosing the medication than, say, when her physician prescribes an antibiotic for a sinus
infection. The issue then arises whether the learned intermediary doctrine should be extended to the increasingly popular drugs advertised
directly to consumers. Television ads tout the benefits of the latest drug
for arthritis, allergies, or erectile dysfunction, encouraging consumers
to ask their doctors to prescribe those drugs in particular; if consumers
are exercising more choice, should that choice be informed by an appropriate warning?
What Damages Can a Plaintiff Get in a Tort Case?
Tort law cannot undo the consequences of an accident by healing a
broken arm or taking away the pain of an injury. What it does instead is
to award money damages in an attempt to compensate the injured plaintiff for the loss she has suffered at the hands of the defendant. The goal is
to put the plaintiff in the position she would have been in if the accident
had never happened, so far as it is possible to do so by giving her a sum
of money to make up for her loss.
Because these damages are awarded to compensate the victim for the
harm suffered, they are called compensatory damages.
Consider the tragic fate of Keva Richardson, whose car was struck
from behind by a semi-trailer while stopped at a traffic light in Highland
Park, Illinois. Richardson had just moved to the Chicago area from her
native Texas to start her new job as a flight attendant for American
Airlines; she planned to work for the airline for a few years and then return to school for a post-graduate degree in education, with the ultimate
goal of becoming a teacher. Those plans were ended by the accident,
which fractured her cervical vertebra and severely damaged her spinal
cord. She underwent surgery to stabilize her spine and spent five months
in a rehabilitation institute, with subsequent follow-up visits and occasional hospitalizations. As a result of her injuries, Richardson lost the
use of her legs, has only limited use of her arms, with loss of control of
Law 101
172
her fingers and the fine muscles in her hands, is unable to control her
bladder or bowel functions, is at risk for pneumonia, infections, and
pressure ulcers, and can expect to be hospitalized periodically for the
rest of her life.
The legal system cannot adequately compensate Keva Richardson for
her injuries, just as medical science cannot cure them. The best it can do
is attempt to measure her injuries and require the negligent truck driver
who injured her, and his employer and their insurance companies, to pay
money to ease the burden of those injuries.
Richardson suffered several kinds of losses. Up to the time of trial, she
incurred medical expenses of $258,814, and she lost income from being
out of work. But her losses did not end at the time of trial. Based on
the testimony of her doctors and expert economists, the jury estimated
that her total lost earnings would be $900,000 and her future medical
expenses would be $11 million. All of these are elements of the financial
loss inflicted on her by the defendant and are appropriately awarded as
damages for economic loss.
The financial consequences of the injury are not even the whole story.
Richardson suffers pain in her legs and shoulders. She is self-conscious
about her appearance because of the facial injuries she suffered in the
accident and because of being in a wheelchair. What she misses most, she
testified, is “just being able to get up in the morning and begin her day”
and then go through the day without assistance from others; she requires
help to shower and dress, she can only push her wheelchair on a smooth,
level surface, and she needs help to empty her bladder by catheterization
every six hours and to empty her bowels every day. Of course, she also
endured the pain of the accident and her operation and now is unable to
carry out many of the activities she could do before, and she knows she
is unable to return to her job as a flight attendant or achieve her ambition of becoming a teacher.
To compensate for losses like these, tort law gives noneconomic
damages. The jury awarded Richardson $3.5 million for being disabled,
$2.1 million for disfigurement, and $4.6 million for noneconomic loss.
Although noneconomic damages are commonly referred to as pain and
suffering, Richardson’s case illustrates why they are broader than that.
In addition to the physical pain caused by her injuries, she suffers a loss
of quality of life in being unable to carry on her normal, daily activities,
to enjoy life in the same way she could before the accident, and to fulfill
her dreams.
The principle here is easy to state: Money damages are awarded to remove the economic consequences of an injury and to provide monetary
compensation for the noneconomic consequences. The amount required
Tort Law
173
to compensate the plaintiff is the measure of the harm done by the defendant. The defendant is responsible for these damages as a matter of
fairness and social policy. (The rules are much more complicated in their
application, of course, but we will not worry about the details here.)
Notice several striking features of this seemingly simple system.
First, the system operates under a single-judgment rule. Tort damages
are awarded only once, at the time of trial. At the time of trial the past
damages are relatively straightforward. Richardson incurred medical expenses and presented bills to prove it, and she was out of work
for a time and could prove what she would have earned for that time.
Damages for pain and suffering are much hazier (more on that in a
moment), but at least the plaintiff and other witnesses could describe
how she had been feeling, how her activities had been limited, and so on.
The single-judgment rule also requires a prediction about the future,
and the future is necessarily uncertain. The court must make a prediction about the plaintiff’s future losses based on the evidence presented by
both parties. The plaintiff’s injury might get better or worse, requiring
little more treatment or major surgery. Her pain and her ability to
function normally might diminish or increase. Keva Richardson was
working as a flight attendant, she had a bachelor’s degree in elementary
education, and she expected to return to graduate school and then teach.
Predicting her future career path over several decades, and therefore her
lost earning capacity, requires speculation.
The single-judgment rule is an instance in which serving the tort
policies in a precise manner yields to administrative efficiency. The court
could maintain control of the case into the indefinite future, requiring
the defendant to pay the plaintiff’s expenses as they arise and compensate periodically for noneconomic losses. The tort system does not do
this because it would be too complicated and burdensome; to make
things simpler, we accept the fact that many of the predictions about
future damages will turn out to be wrong, with the plaintiff getting too
little and the defendant not paying enough, or vice versa, as the facts
turn out. In an increasing number of cases, the plaintiff does not receive
the damage award in a lump sum. Instead, through a structured settlement, the award is paid out over time, much like an annuity. Sometimes
the parties use a structured settlement to guarantee that the money will
be available as it is needed in the future. In other cases, tort reform statutes require that a structured settlement be used, and even provide that
benefits end if the plaintiff dies, which works to the defendant’s benefit.
Second, the damage award is individualized to the particular accident
and the circumstances of the particular plaintiff. Keva Richardson received the damages from her accident, not from the average rear-end car
Law 101
174
accident or the average person with a medical condition like hers. Or
imagine a series of drivers, each of whom ignores a stop sign and drives
into an intersection, hitting a pedestrian. Each driver commits an identical act of negligence but pays a very different damage award. The first
driver delivers only a glancing blow, so the pedestrian is only slightly
bruised. That driver’s damages will be trivial. The second driver also
delivers a glancing blow, but the pedestrian suffers from a degenerative
bone disease, so the slight touch of the car causes major fractures of both
legs. Under the rule that the defendant “takes the victim as he finds him,”
the defendant is liable for all of the plaintiff’s huge medical bills and substantial income loss. The third driver runs over the pedestrian, seriously
injuring him, but this pedestrian is an ailing, elderly person with a short
life expectancy and no job, so the damages for future economic and
noneconomic losses are small. The fourth driver also runs over the pedestrian, but the pedestrian happens to be basketball superstar LeBron
James, so the driver is liable for James’s lost earning capacity in the tens
of millions of dollars.
As these hypotheticals suggest, the desire to compensate the plaintiff for her actual losses is in tension with the tort policy of providing
incentives for proper conduct. The costs of a negligent act are hard to
predict in advance and fortuitous in practice, making it difficult for
defendants to assess how much to invest in reasonable care. They also
suggest that tort damages, like so many other things, follow the existing
distribution of wealth and income in society. Tort law compensates rich,
highly paid plaintiffs more than poor plaintiffs with fewer economic
prospects.
Third, the jury’s award of damages is not the final word on the subject. The trial judge and, to a lesser extent, the appellate court can review
the award and set aside the verdict. The usual standard for doing so is
that the jury’s award is “against the weight of the evidence”; this is a deferential standard of review, because damages are a fact within the jury’s
purview, and the award should be upset only if it reflects passion or prejudice rather than a reasoned assessment of the evidence. (This explains
why the appellate court should be more circumspect in reviewing the verdict, because only the trial judge actually heard all the evidence.) Some
state tort reform statutes have given the judges more power to review
jury verdicts; in New York, for example, a verdict can be overturned if
it “deviates materially from what would be reasonable compensation.”
In the overwhelming majority of cases, judges review jury damage
awards to determine if they are too high, not if they are too low. The
traditional remedy for an excessive verdict is to award a new trial to the
defendant. Sometimes, however, through a device known as remittitur,
Tort Law
175
the court offers the plaintiff a choice between going to trial again or
taking a smaller award without a new trial. In Keva Richardson’s case,
for example, the appellate court determined that the damages for future
medical costs were higher than the evidence justified, so they ordered
remittitur in the amount of $1 million, reducing the jury’s award by that
amount. Remittitur saves the expense of a new trial, but it also can put
to the plaintiff a difficult choice: take less than the jury thought she was
entitled to or undergo the delay and expense of a new trial and roll the
dice on a second jury. The choice is particularly difficult if the plaintiff
needs the money for ongoing care or living expenses. (The parallel procedure of additur, by which the court offers the defendant the choice of
paying a larger award or going to trial again, is used much less often.)
Fourth, a substantial portion of many tort awards is for the victim’s
noneconomic loss. Noneconomic loss includes physical pain and
suffering, anguish or depression resulting from an injury, emotional harm
that accompanies disability or disfigurement, loss of enjoyment of life,
inability to perform normal activities such as taking a walk in the park
or enjoying sexual relations, and all other forms of emotional distress
caused by an injury. There is no doubt that these are real losses, but there
also is no doubt that money doesn’t make up for them. Traditionally,
courts have concluded that an award for noneconomic loss serves several purposes. It provides some measure, however inadequate, of the
victim’s loss, affirming the significance of her injury and requiring that
the defendant bear the full cost of his wrongdoing (which encourages
potential defendants to take those costs into account in calculating how
much care to exercise). It also provides the victim a fund for activities
and pleasures that can reduce her pain and make up for her loss of enjoyment; the victim who can build a new swimming pool may find a
partial substitute for her lost ability to play tennis. Finally, damages for
noneconomic loss provide a means of paying the plaintiff’s attorneys’
fees while allowing the award for economic loss to remain intact; otherwise, the plaintiff is not fully compensated for her economic loss because
of the need to pay a lawyer.
These reasons have considerable power to them. Tort reformers
think things have gone too far, however, and have enacted in many
states legislation limiting damages for noneconomic loss. One widely
adopted measure, first enacted in California in 1975 and popular among
tort reformers ever since, imposes an absolute cap of $250,000 on
noneconomic damages in medical malpractice cases. An absolute cap
affects different victims in different ways. In California, for example,
infants and women are among the groups whose damages are most often
capped. Infants who suffer lifelong, disabling injuries at birth are likely to
Law 101
176
have huge noneconomic losses because of the extent of their injuries, but
the damages for those losses are limited by the cap. Conversely, women
on average have smaller economic losses relative to their noneconomic
losses than men, because of their lower earning capacity, so they are also
very likely to have their damages cut by the cap. A stay-at-home mom
may suffer no income loss from a botched operation, for example, so her
noneconomic loss will be a more important part of her award, compared
to that of her high-earning husband.
Indeed, the effect of a cap may be to deny many victims a remedy
at all. A  damage cap reduces the potential recovery and accordingly
reduces the potential contingent fee for the victim’s lawyer. Therefore,
lawyers are less likely to take cases in which liability is not clear or economic loss is not large; the mom who suffered from the operation may
not be able to find a lawyer willing to take her case.
When Are Damages Awarded to Punish the Defendant?
The typical tort damages are purely compensatory. They may be burdensome to the defendant, even to the point of bankruptcy, but the measure
of damages is the plaintiff’s loss. In extreme cases, however, a different
kind of damage is awarded with the sole purpose of punishing the defendant for doing wrong. These are called punitive damages or exemplary damages.
As a matter of law and practice, punitive damages are awarded in
only a very small number of cases. The law on punitive damages varies
from state to state, but everywhere something more than ordinary negligence or even the typical intentional tort is required before punitive
damages can be awarded. The tests are stated in terms such as whether
the defendant’s conduct “shocks the conscience,” is “outrageous,” or
demonstrates a “reckless indifference” or “willful and wanton disregard” for the safety of the plaintiff. Because of the narrowness of the
standard, punitive damages are awarded in only 1 or 2 percent of the
tort cases that go to judgment.
Punitive damages, especially large amounts of punitive damages,
are most often awarded in commercial cases. A leading U.S. Supreme
Court case on punitive damages, for example, involved a false advertising claim by the maker of the popular Leatherman multifunction tool
against one of its competitors. Sometimes, though, personal injury cases
produce substantial punitive damage awards. Asbestos manufacturers
concealed the harmful effects of asbestos for decades and were held
accountable through punitive damages in several cases; in one case, a
worker recovered compensatory damages of $1.8 million and punitive
Tort Law
177
damages of $31  million. A  long-time smoker who contracted lung
cancer sued Philip Morris for misrepresenting the dangers of smoking;
a jury awarded him $3 billion in punitive damages, an amount that was
reduced to $50 million on appeal. A. H. Robins Co. was held liable for
$10 million in a Kansas case for “malicious silence” in concealing information about the dangers of its Dalkon Shield contraceptive device.
Punitive damages serve two purposes. As the name suggests, they
punish the defendant for its wrongdoing. The law has different means
of punishing wrongdoers; the criminal process is the most obvious.
Administrative penalties serve a punitive function—such as when the
motor vehicles bureau suspends a driver’s license or the Securities and
Exchange Commission suspends a stockbroker’s license. But private
civil litigation also serves public values, and plaintiffs who seek punitive
damages become private prosecutors of the public good. The dangerous
or wrongful behavior of defendants who intentionally manufacture dangerous products might not fit within a definition of criminal conduct or
come to the attention of the public prosecutor. Punitive damages punish
just as criminal penalties do, and the award of damages is a reward and
incentive to the injured plaintiff to serve the public good in this way.
The second purpose is to enhance the deterrent effect of tort law. In
some cases, the defendant’s conduct is so outrageous that the award
of compensatory damages seems insufficient to deter it. In other cases,
compensatory damages are inadequate because all of the injured victims
will not sue or recover. In both situations, punitive damages reduce
the defendant’s incentive to engage in wrongful conduct, acting as a
big stick that requires a potential wrongdoer to think twice about the
consequences of his or her actions.
Punitive damages are not numerically an important part of the tort
system. Despite spectacular news reports, the proportion of cases in
which punitive damages are awarded has not really increased in recent
years, and most punitive damage awards arise out of wrongful business
transactions, not personal injuries. Nevertheless, punitive damages have
attracted the attention of tort reformers and are under attack in many
jurisdictions. The key to the attack is the degree of discretion afforded
to the jury in determining when to award punitive damages and how
high they should be. As in setting pain and suffering damages, the judge
gives guidelines to the jury, but the jury has leeway in determining what
amount is necessary to punish the defendant.
As a result of these attacks, a number of state statutes have imposed
restrictions on the award of punitive damages. Some statutes cap punitive damages, either at a flat dollar amount or as a multiple of the compensatory damages award. Others impose higher burdens of proof or set
Law 101
178
narrow limits on the kind of behavior for which punitive damages can
be awarded. The U.S. Supreme Court also has developed constitutional
limits on punitive damages. In a series of cases beginning in 1996, the
Court defined a standard for the award of punitive damages beyond
which they are constitutionally excessive. Courts reviewing jury awards
of punitive damages have to weigh the degree of reprehensibility of the
defendant’s misconduct, the relation between the compensatory and punitive damage awards (with few awards exceeding a single-digit ratio of
punitive to compensatory damages passing constitutional muster), and
the difference between the punitive damages award and civil penalties
in comparable cases. In Philip Morris USA v. Williams (2007), for example, a jury awarded compensatory damages of $821,000 and punitive
damages of $79.5 million to the widow of a deceased smoker because
Philip Morris knowingly and falsely led him to believe that smoking was
safe. The Court recognized that conduct like that injures many people
and so is especially reprehensible, part of the constitutional standard for
assessing punitive damages, but it held that a punitive damages award
cannot be based on harm to people other than the parties to the immediate litigation. As a result of the Court’s rules, the largest awards,
directed at the worst behavior, are the most likely to be cut.
6
A Deal’s a Deal
Contract Law
In the novel and film The Paper Chase, the distant, forbidding Professor
Kingsfield is the caricature of the law teacher who can both stimulate
and terrorize his students. It is no accident that Kingsfield was portrayed
as a professor of contract law. Contract law ought to be simple—a deal
is a deal—but it often is regarded as the most challenging subject in the
first year of law school, the subject that has tormented the most students.
And with good reason.
What Is Contract Law?
Contract law concerns all aspects of the making, keeping, and breaking
of promises and agreements. People make promises and agreements all
the time. Dana asks Brian over to her apartment for dinner Saturday
night; he says he will come and bring the wine. A consumer accepts a
junk mail solicitation for a Visa card by signing a form with paragraphs
of fine-print terms on the back or signs up for a Visa card by filling in a
form online and clicking the “I accept” box. A worker takes a new job,
with or without a written employment contract. A construction company contracts with a land developer for the erection of a large office
building.
These promises and agreements, and the millions more that people
make every day, are vastly different from each other. Agreeing to come
to dinner is different from agreeing to build an office building. Agreeing
to come to dinner on a typical Saturday night is even different from
agreeing to go to the once-in-a-lifetime senior prom. Taking a part-time
job flipping burgers at the local McDonald’s is different from signing an
employment contract to become president of McDonald’s Corporation.
Despite the differences, contract law deals with all of these events. If
Brian stands up Dana, can she sue him for the money she spent on food
Law 101
180
and a new dress? Is the Visa customer bound by all the fine print he
didn’t read and wouldn’t understand anyway? If the office building
takes months longer to build and comes in far over budget, who is
responsible—the developer or the construction company? Contract law
provides the answers, or at least the vehicle through which we can argue
about what the answers should be.
Contract law governs different types of agreements without regard
for who made them or what their subject matter is, but some types
of agreements are excluded from its scope. For example, contract law
governs the employment contract between the president of Ford and the
company, but a specialized body of law, known as labor law, governs
the collective bargaining agreement between Ford and the United Auto
Workers, the union that represents Ford’s factory workers. The agreement among the partners in a law firm is a contract, but partnership
law, rather than general contract law, controls the agreement. The rules
and principles of contract law underlie labor law and partnership law,
but they have been adapted to meet the needs of the specialized subject matter. In this way, contract law is residual—it deals with all those
agreements that are left over after certain types of contracts are dealt
with by other, more specialized areas of law.
Contract law’s focus on promises and agreements distinguishes it from
the two other major areas of private law: property law and tort law.
Promises and agreements look to the future—the date on Saturday night
or the building of an office building over a period of years. Contract
law, therefore, is concerned with what will be. When someone makes
a promise and fails to keep it, contract law makes her pay because she
has failed to bring about a future state of affairs to which her promise
committed her. Property law, on the other hand, deals with what is.
When a trespasser enters someone’s property without permission, the
trespasser is liable for interfering with an existing state of affairs—the
owner’s right to use the property and to exclude others from using
it. Tort law looks to what was—the past state of affairs before harm
occurred. A driver who negligently injures a pedestrian is liable because
he has made the pedestrian worse off than he was before by taking away
something the pedestrian had before the accident, such as his health or
earning capacity.
Why Do We Need Contract Law?
From the lawyer’s perspective, contracts are the mechanism by which society works and contract law is the lubricant that makes the mechanism
work better. In a market economy, work is done, goods are distributed,
Contract Law
181
and specialization of labor and production is coordinated through
contracts. People want a means of transportation, and Ford makes it
available to them by offering for sale cheap subcompacts and large SUVs.
If the cars are attractive and the price competitive, people will contract
to buy them. Ford meets consumer demand by hiring workers, buying
raw steel and finished tires, advertising the cars on television, franchising
local dealers to sell its cars, and entering into a thousand other contracts.
This complex system of production and distribution is not dictated by a
Central Commissar of Automobile Production, as it might have been in
the former Soviet Union; instead, it is organized through the interaction
of many contracts.
These contracts benefit the participants: Ford hopes to make a profit,
its workers get paid, Goodyear sells tires at a profit to Ford, and the car
buyer gets a usable car at an attractive price. Economic theory asserts
that everyone benefits from a contract-based market system because
people get what they want and resources are used most effectively. If
drivers want fuel-efficient cars that are easy to park, Ford will produce
and sell more hybrids and subcompacts; if they want big gas guzzlers,
Ford will provide SUVs. If Ford guesses wrong about what consumers
want, Toyota will get their business instead. All of these economic effects
are achieved by the coordination of individual choices through contracts.
The contract process provides more than products. People can fulfill
their desires and achieve what they want in life through the agreements
they make. Going to college, choosing one job over another, building
a home, collecting art, and joining health clubs are all accomplished
through contracts. Seen broadly, the contracting process is about the
freedom and autonomy of each individual. In our kind of open, democratic society, according to this view, individuals are free to the extent
that they can make choices.
Contracts, therefore, define what we mean by a society based on the
market and individual choice. Contract law has two special functions
in making this kind of society possible. It provides a dispute resolution
mechanism for exchanges, and it demonstrates society’s commitment to
freedom and autonomy.
If the performance of both parties to an agreement could occur at
the moment the contract is made, contract law would be unnecessary.
Immediate, simultaneous performance is seldom the case, however. An
agreement to buy a house must be made weeks or months before the
deal closes to allow time for the buyer to obtain a mortgage and for the
seller to prepare to move. Therefore, contract law provides security for
exchanges that are projected into the future. Between the time of agreement and the time for final performance, many things can happen that
Law 101
182
may upset the relationship. The buyer may find a better house, have a
change of heart, or be unable to get a mortgage. By providing an enforcement mechanism for agreements that are to be performed in the
future, contract law assures contracting parties that they can make plans
or investments in reliance on the promises others have made to them.
The home seller can get ready to move, knowing that contract law deters
the buyer from changing his mind and gives the seller a remedy if the
buyer does try to back out.
Contract law also offers a mechanism for working out problems that
arise during or after performance. The home seller and buyer may not
have stated in their sales contract what happens if the house burns down
before the time of closing, but the law will deal with that problem if it
occurs.
While contract law is useful in performing these functions, lawyers
are inclined to overstate its importance. Contract law is important—
contracting parties consult their lawyers for help in planning and
drafting agreements and resolving disputes—but when we look at the
entire landscape of contracting in society, we see that contract law is
only a small part of the picture.
Most agreements are made and performed with no trouble. Law
students are trained to look on every deal as a potential disaster, so
lawyers often lose sight of how well things usually work. For example,
of the millions of contracts made each year by Ford, its suppliers, and
its dealers, only a small number generate problems. Most of the time
Goodyear delivers the tires on time and they are of the specified quality,
and the car buyer gets the car from the dealer with no problem. In an
economy based on private agreements, everything has to run smoothly
most of the time or the system falls apart. Fortunately, everything usually does run smoothly, so contract law has to step in on relatively few
occasions.
Even when trouble does occur in a contract, contract law is a remedy of
last resort. When a dispute arises between Ford and one of its suppliers,
neither of them will immediately call their lawyers. Instead, the purchasing agent for Ford and the sales manager for the supplier will get on
the phone and try to work things out. The supplier wants to protect its
reputation and the prospect of future sales to Ford, and Ford wants to
keep its assembly line moving, so either or both of them may be willing
to make concessions to resolve the problem. People enter into contracts
to get things done, not to establish their legal rights in case of breach. If
problems do arise, persuading the other party, appealing to reasonable
standards of behavior, or threatening economic sanctions are remedies
much preferred to calling in lawyers and engaging in expensive litigation.
Contract Law
183
Often, the size of the dispute does not justify litigation anyway. A homeowner who is dissatisfied with the job a plumber did replacing a faucet
may complain to the plumber or post a negative rating online but is unlikely to sue for the hundred dollars it will cost to have the job redone.
The second and more general function of contract law is to honor
individual freedom and autonomy. Contract law demonstrates the law’s
respect for these values by enforcing the agreements people make and by
imposing obligations on people only when and to the extent that they
consent to assume those obligations. This is what we mean by freedom
of contract. Freedom of contract encompasses freedom to contract and
freedom from contract. Freedom to contract is the ability to enter into
any kind of agreement that you want. In theory, your ability to enter into
contracts is unrestrained by contract law. Freedom from contract is your
ability to not enter into an agreement unless you choose to do so. If you
don’t want to buy a car from Ford, the company cannot get a court to
order you to do so.
For more than a century, freedom of contract has been both the central organizing principle of contract law and a rallying cry for an individualist philosophy of social organization. But freedom of contract is
one of those great slogans in law and politics that captures an idea by
ignoring any of the subtlety that implementation of the idea requires.
Actually, freedom of contract reflects an important aspect of the idea of
choice or consent that underlies contract law, but the principle can be
misleading if not applied carefully.
To see some of the subtleties and weaknesses in freedom of contract, think about a classic case, Hurley v. Eddingfield, from the Indiana
Supreme Court in 1901. George Eddingfield, a physician in the small town
of Mace, Indiana, was the Burks’ family doctor and attended Charlotte
Burk during her pregnancy. When Charlotte went into labor she became
seriously ill. Her family sent for Eddingfield, but he refused to come.
Several times a messenger went to Eddingfield, told him that Charlotte
and her unborn child were in danger and that no other doctor was available, and tendered payment of his fee. Nevertheless, Eddingfield refused
to come to her aid “without any reason whatever,” as the court said.
Charlotte and her baby died because of the lack of medical treatment,
and her heirs sued Eddingfield.
The Indiana Supreme Court held that Eddingfield had no duty as a
licensed physician to come to Charlotte’s aid. And the court could not
even consider the idea that Eddingfield, as the Burks’ family doctor, had
a duty as a matter of contract law to come to the aid of his patient. The
principle of freedom from contract speaks directly to this issue. Because
contract law is based on consent, no one can be compelled to enter into
Law 101
184
a contract against his will, not even the only physician available to treat
a dying patient whom he had treated previously.
Hurley v. Eddingfield illustrates some difficulties of freedom of contract and of the idea of choice or consent that underlies contract law.
First, freedom from contract is not an absolute principle. Because our
sentiments have changed since 1901, federal law today requires hospitals
to treat patients in certain circumstances, including women in labor.
Many other laws also require people to enter into contracts whether they
want to or not, thereby limiting their freedom from contract. A prejudiced employer might want to refuse to hire blacks, Muslims, or women,
but the civil rights laws bar him from doing so. A driver has to contract
with an insurance company to obtain state-mandated auto insurance as
a condition of driving a car.
Second, even when freedom of contract does apply, a person’s freedom
to contract is powerfully influenced by the practical circumstances of
the situation. In Hurley, for example, the patient’s choice of a physician
is controlled by the system for the delivery of medical care. By the beginning of the twentieth century physicians had established themselves
as a licensed profession, begun to severely limit entry into the profession, and engaged in a campaign to eliminate other types of health care
practitioners. All of this may have left Burk with no source of medical
care other than the single doctor in a small Indiana town. Her family’s
choices would have been very different if more doctors had been available or if medical care had been regarded as a public resource that was
available to everyone through a government program.
We can see similar influences in many contemporary settings. Advertising shapes consumer preferences. Many communities have no adequate public transportation systems, so people need to buy cars. In a
recession workers often have to take whatever jobs they can get on whatever terms are available. Thus the ideal of freedom of contract is always
put into practice against a background of social factors and economic
constraints. When the law defines the contours of freedom of contract, it
has to decide the extent to which we want to consider that background.
Third, contract law is only partly about choice. Suppose that, because Eddingfield repeatedly treated Burk and her family, over time they
thought of each other as “my doctor” and “my patient.” Then we could
assume that there was a relationship of family doctor and patient here.
Can we infer from this that Eddingfield has agreed to come when called
in emergencies? If so, we are moving away from consent as the basis of
contract. The parties to a contract may be bound to a particular term—
providing service in an emergency—even if they did not actually agree
Contract Law
185
to it or never thought specifically about it. We could say that the patient
has a right to expect that her doctor would treat her in an emergency
because of the usual terms of the doctor–patient relationship. If that is
so, then the basis of contractual liability is protecting the patient’s expectation raised by the relationship of being a family doctor, rather than
the intent behind it. But even that is not quite right. Just as Eddingfield
may not have intended to provide emergency service, Burk may not have
thought about the issue in advance either. In that case, she had no real expectations to protect. When the emergency does arise, though, we could
still hold the doctor liable for failing to respond. The basis of liability in
that case flows from our sense of the relationship itself. And, taking one
more step away from consent, our sense of what those obligations are is
not derived from some simple empirical survey about what doctors and
patients think and how they ordinarily act. Each of us determines what
we think the right answer should be based on evidence about the typical
doctor–patient relationship, our own experience with doctors, and our
sense of what kinds of duties people should owe to each other.
This decision about the extent of legal obligation in a case like Hurley
v. Eddingfield, as in any other contract case, is a decision about what
is the best social policy. The consent of the parties does not determine
the scope of freedom to contract and freedom from contract; the legal
system necessarily makes this judgment. When a court says that a doctor
does or does not have to treat a patient in an emergency, we are making
the same kind of judgment that the legislature makes when it says, for
example, that an automobile driver must carry insurance or an employer
cannot discriminate on the basis of race. Each of these rules rests on a
decision about what is best for the interest of society as a whole. Thus
choice in a contractual setting always operates against a background of
legal policymaking.
How Do You Make a Contract?
You can make a contract almost any way you want.
The basic principles of contract law dictate what it takes to make a
contract. We look to see whether a reasonable person would be justified in believing that a person has made a promise—that the person
has chosen to commit to a future course of action. The two elements of
promise—commitment and future—are the keys to contracting and contract law. When you promise to do something, you are saying that you
really will do it, not that you will do it if you feel like it when the time
comes or you will do it unless you change your mind.
Law 101
186
The best way of determining if someone has made a promise is through
words of commitment. When someone says, “I promise to pay $5,000
for your car,” it is reasonable to believe that the person is committed
to buying the car. But that is by no means the only way of finding
commitment to contract. It’s possible to make a contract by implication
or with no words at all. At an auction, the auctioneer says, “We have
this lovely Picasso.” As in innumerable comedy sketches, if you raise
your hand, nod your head, or scratch your nose, you may have obligated
yourself to pay $20 million for the painting.
This area is called the law of contract formation—how a contract is formed. There are two questions in the law of contract formation:  What are we looking for? Where do we look to find it?
Proceeding from the idea that contract law is about manifested consent, we look to see if the parties have demonstrated their consent to
enter into a contract. To determine that, we look at the words and
conduct of the parties.
Consider a set of facts that illustrates a well-formed contract. An
employee is working under an employment contract that expires on
December 15. In early December the president of the company offers to
renew the employee’s contract for another year. The president and the
employee discuss in detail the employee’s duties, salary, health benefits,
vacation, and sick leave and incorporate their understanding in a lengthy
written document. With great ceremony they both sign the written contract, shake hands, and break out the champagne to toast the continuation of their relationship.
In this hypothetical, both of the contract formation questions can be
answered easily. By executing a written document labeled “Employment
Agreement” that contains the terms we normally see in such a document,
the president and the employee have indicated that they intend to enter
into the legal relationship called an employment contract; their handshake and champagne toast, while not necessary, also show their intent.
The document is detailed and specific about the content of the contract;
this is further evidence of their intent because people who write out and
sign agreements at this length usually intend to be bound by them, and
it gives the court somewhere to find the terms of the agreement in case
a dispute arises.
This hypothetical illustrates a well-formed contract because the evidence of assent to contract is compelling and the resulting agreement
is clear and complete. Here the contract is formed at the moment when
both sign the document, but the agreement process can take other forms.
Often formation occurs through offer and acceptance, in which one
party initiates the agreement process and the other party then completes
Contract Law
187
it. An email saying, “I will sell you my car for $5,000” is an offer that
you accept by writing back, “I will buy it.”
Unfortunately for contract law, the perfectly formed contract is elusive. Many contracts are not formed with this degree of precision or
clarity. Consider the actual case on which the previous hypothetical is
based, Embry v. Hargadine, McKittrick Dry Goods Co. (1907).
Embry was the manager of the samples department of a dry goods
company. Although Embry’s contract was due to expire on December
15, McKittrick, the president of the company, had put him off whenever
he tried to raise the issue of a renewal. Finally, on December 23, Embry
went to McKittrick and said he would quit then and there unless they
agreed on a contract for another year. McKittrick asked him how his
department was getting along, and Embry said they were very busy, as
it was the height of the season for getting salespeople out on the road
to see customers. McKittrick then said, “Go ahead, you’re all right. Get
your men out and don’t let that worry you.” Embry, assuming he had a
new contract, worked until February 15, when he was told he was fired.
Was there a contract in this case? Embry thought so, but McKittrick
said that he had just been busy and distracted so he tried to brush off
Embry, not intending to bind the company to a new contract. Here again
we have the issue of whether consent is the exclusive basis of contractual liability. If it is, then Embry is out of luck. Actually, the law says
that if Embry was reasonable in believing that McKittrick was making a
promise, we will protect his reasonable expectation. The test for contract
formation is not whether someone actually intended to make a promise
but whether their words and conduct as reasonably understood by the
person to whom they were directed were sufficient to imply a promise.
(We call the person who makes a promise the promisor and the person
to whom the promise is made the promisee.) The law’s term for this
is manifestation of assent, and it gives us an objective theory of contract formation, focusing on objective, observable factors such as words
and conduct, rather than a subjective theory, which would focus on the
promisor’s actual state of mind.
The purpose of looking at the words rather than the intention is to
protect the reasonable expectations of the person to whom the promise is
directed. As an old legal saying goes, “Not even the Devil knows the mind
of man.” Neither a person hearing a promise nor a court adjudicating
a case has any way of judging another person’s subjective state of mind
except through the words he uses and the actions he takes. When Embry
hears McKittrick say what sounds in the circumstances like a promise,
he is entitled to believe that a promise is being made. Embry reasonably
believes he has a contract and, relying on McKittrick’s manifestation of
Law 101
188
assent, continues working. It would be unfair to disappoint Embry’s belief, so McKittrick is bound even if he never intended to consent to the
contract.
Lawyers often distinguish contract law and tort law by saying that
contract liability is assumed by the exercise of choice while tort liability
is imposed by law even in the absence of consent. What we have done by
the objective theory is make contract law resemble tort law. Using words
is very much like driving a car; if it is not done carefully, someone can be
injured. McKittrick’s words (and the conduct that accompanies them—a
dismissing wave of the hand, a smile, a shrug) can raise an expectation
in Embry and cause him to keep working at his job instead of taking another one. Whether or not McKittrick intends to be bound by his words,
he should be careful in considering their effect on Embry. If he is not
careful, he can be liable for “negligent promising,” just as he would be
liable if he physically injured Embry by negligent driving.
A common formation problem concerns indefinite contracts. Suppose
a written agreement for the sale of a house doesn’t state anything about
when the closing of the transaction will take place (that is, when the
buyer will hand over the money in return for the deed). Or suppose that
it has all the other relevant terms but doesn’t include the price because
they haven’t agreed on one. If the seller wants to get out of the deal, he
might argue in either case that the agreement is too indefinite to enforce.
Definiteness is important in contract formation for two reasons. First,
definiteness is evidence of consent; we ordinarily assume that a contract that dots all the i’s and crosses the t’s is better evidence of intent to
contract than one that leaves large areas uncovered. Second, a definite
contract gives the court a better basis for dealing with a breach. If the
contract doesn’t say when the parties will perform, the court cannot
know when they are in breach; if it doesn’t say what the price is, the
court will be hard-pressed to prescribe a remedy.
Going back to the objective test, we can see these two cases are
different. Proceeding from the reasonable expectations of the parties,
can we fill in the gap in either agreement? Where they have not specified
a date for the closing, we might say that the parties have a reasonable
time to perform. We can determine a reasonable time by looking at similar real estate transactions and at what the parties have to do to prepare
for closing—in this case, the buyer needs time to get a mortgage or otherwise raise the money. Based on all this information, we might conclude
that sixty or ninety days would be a reasonable time. But what is a reasonable price where the parties have not specified one? Although we can
look at the sale prices of comparable properties, we have the sense that
every property is different and sellers and buyers usually negotiate about
Contract Law
189
price on an individual basis. Accordingly, we might be more reluctant to
impose a price term on the parties than a time of performance term, so
where there is no price term here, there is no contract.
Does a Contract Have to Be in Writing to Be Enforceable?
Usually, a contract doesn’t have to be in writing. As long as the parties
sufficiently indicate that they intend to make a contract, oral promises
are enforceable.
There are some kinds of contracts, however, that must be in writing
to be enforceable. These are the promises governed by the Statute of
Frauds. The Statute of Frauds originally was enacted in Britain in 1677
and was designed to cut down on widespread fraud and perjury at the
time of the English revolution. The statute listed a number of kinds of
contracts in which the problem of fraud was thought to be especially
acute and required that there be written evidence of the agreement to
make the contract enforceable.
The Statute of Frauds has been copied in every common law jurisdiction. (Oddly enough, Parliament repealed most of the British Statute in
1954.) The list of contracts required by the statute to be in writing varies
from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, but there are a few that are commonly
on the list:
• A contract to pay someone else’s debt.
• A contract for the sale of an interest in land.
• A contract that is not to be performed within one year of the time it
is made.
• A contract for the sale of goods for $500 or more.
To enforce one of these contracts, a plaintiff must produce a writing
signed by the other party that contains evidence of the contract. Because
of the ubiquity of email and Internet transactions, federal law and statutes
in most states specify that an electronic record can substitute for a physical writing where the parties have agreed to do business electronically.
The Statute of Frauds expresses contract law’s preference for formality in the execution of contracts. When contracting parties observe
prescribed formalities such as signing a writing to enter into a contract,
it brings home to them the seriousness of their actions, just as when children making a promise say “cross my heart and hope to die.” Observing
Law 101
190
formalities also gives the court solid evidence of their intent to make a
contract and of the terms on which they agreed.
Formality is a concern in other areas of the law for the same reasons.
We regard some acts as sufficiently important to prescribe certain
formalities that the participants must observe before the law will recognize the acts. A will must be in writing, signed, and witnessed. A deed
transferring property must be signed, sealed, and delivered. The problem
with required formalities, however, is that sometimes people just won’t
follow them. An ailing, elderly man will scribble a few notes about how
he wants his property distributed after his death. A landowner will informally divide up her land among her children without giving them
deeds. In each case, upsetting the transaction because the proper formality wasn’t followed can create havoc in a settled relationship or go
against the obvious intentions of the participants. On the other hand,
recognizing the informal transaction undermines the strength of the formality requirement. In dealing with these cases, we are in the awkward
but frequent situation of having created a policy (here formality) to prevent injustice but knowing that strictly applying the policy will cause
injustice.
The courts’ interpretation of the Statute of Frauds reflects the conflict
between honoring the desire for formality and recognizing the need to
loosen the requirements to do justice in individual cases. In determining
whether a particular contract is covered by the statute, courts are more
rigorous in areas in which they think formality is really important and
more relaxed in areas in which it is not. The sale of land, for example,
is usually an economically significant transaction and one in which it is
important to have a written record to establish ownership. Therefore,
courts broadly interpret the scope of the statute to cover most options,
sales contracts, and other agreements concerning the transfer, leasing, or
mortgaging of land. It is not as obvious why contracts that are not to be
performed within one year are within the statute, so courts water down
the scope of the one-year requirement, most importantly by reading the
statutory requirement of “a contract that is not to be performed within
one year” as “a contract that cannot be performed within one year.”
Thus a contract to build a skyscraper is not within the statute because
it is theoretically possible (though physically impossible) to build a skyscraper within one year; if anyone were foolish enough to agree to build
a skyscraper without signing a written contract, the agreement would be
enforceable.
Courts also recognize the need for flexibility in the application of the
Statute of Frauds by loosely interpreting the requirement that the contract be evidenced by a writing. As universally interpreted, the statute
Contract Law
191
does not require that a single document signed by both parties be
presented to prove the existence of the contract. The contract can be
constructed from letters, emails, forms, checks, or receipts made by the
parties. All of the terms do not have to be stated if there is sufficient evidence of the crucial terms. And the writings do not have to contain a full
signature; initials, a rubber stamp, or a printed letterhead are sufficient
to authenticate the document.
Can Anyone Make a Contract?
Almost anyone can make a contract, but two groups of people are specially protected by contract law:  children who have not reached the
legal age of majority (generally eighteen years old) and people operating
under a mental disability. If a child or a person lacking mental capacity
makes an agreement, it is voidable on her part. People like these are said
to lack the capacity to contract.
At first glance this result seems to follow from the basic principle that
drives contract law. Contracts are based on free choice, but some people
are incapable of making a free choice. A child has not achieved the maturity necessary to exercise real choice. Some adults suffer from disabilities
that deprive them of the cognitive capacity to make a meaningful choice,
or they may attempt to make an agreement while under the influence of
drugs or alcohol that have the same disabling effect.
Remember, though, the counterprinciple that the enforcement of
contracts is based on the reasonableness of the expectations of the
person to whom a promise is directed. What happens when someone
contracts with a person who looks nineteen but is really only seventeen,
or with a person who acts normally but is psychotic or drunk? Once
again, we are faced with a conflict of principles. We want to protect
someone who doesn’t have the capacity to contract, but we also want to
protect the person with whom she has contracted when that person has
acted reasonably.
The law responds to these conflicts by sometimes trying to find a
middle ground and sometimes flipping back and forth between the principles. In the case of the intellectually challenged, for example, courts
often say that their disability allows them to get out of the contract only
when the other party knows or has reason to know of their disability.
When the person looks and acts as if he or she has contractual capacity,
it is reasonable to rely on the appearance; on the other hand, when the
contracting partner knows that the other has a history of mental illness
and is making an irrational choice in the present transaction, the partner
can hardly say he suffers by allowing the other out of the contract. In
Law 101
192
the case of minors, courts generally adhere to the rule that someone who
has not reached the age of majority can avoid a contract; a minor who
looks and acts mature is still a minor. But the courts have created a series of exceptions. The minor can ratify his contract after reaching the
age of majority by recognizing it in words or accepting the other party’s
performance, and it then becomes a binding contract. The minor also
is required to pay on his contract when he has received “necessaries.”
That old common law phrase once meant food, drink, and little else,
but today it may bind a child to pay for medical services, education, or a
car. In some states, a minor is obligated to pay for what he has received
under the contract if he has misrepresented his age; the minor who lacks
sufficient maturity to contract is held to a standard of maturity in telling
the truth.
Once Two People Make an Agreement, Is It Always Enforceable?
Not always. (Do you sense a theme here? Law students get very frustrated because the answer to a question is more often “It depends” than
“Yes” or “No.”)
For a long time the great question of contract law was, “Which
promises will the law enforce?” This area of contract doctrine is known
as the validation of promises, and the main doctrine is consideration.
The story of consideration is bizarre but intriguing. For about a hundred
years, beginning in the late nineteenth century, consideration was nominally the central doctrine of contract law. It was so nonsensical in application, however, that courts routinely avoided it and have now discarded
large portions of it. Today consideration doctrine only presents problems
in unusual cases, but a discussion of the doctrine provides interesting
insights into how lawyers think and how contract law has developed.
Consider two simple hypotheticals based on a favorite case of contract law teachers: (1) Uncle agrees to sell and Nephew agrees to buy
Uncle’s car for $5,000. (2) Uncle promises to give Nephew the car on
Nephew’s next birthday. In each case, if Uncle changes his mind, is his
promise enforceable?
The first hypothetical is an easy one. Uncle and Nephew have each
exercised their freedom of contract in an obvious manifestation of assent,
so we are inclined to enforce the promise. The essence of consideration
is the concept of exchange. Any exchange is an enforceable contract, because the parties are the only true judges of value. A car, a year’s work,
and a Picasso painting are worth what someone else is willing to pay for
them. As long as there is manifested intention to enter into a bargain,
there is a contract. The only measure of fairness in a market economy is
Contract Law
193
the price arrived at by a willing buyer and a willing seller, so the court
has no basis for second-guessing the parties’ judgment.
Now consider the second hypothetical:  Uncle’s promise to give the
car to Nephew. Here, too, we have a manifestation of assent. Is it
enough? Although there is a promise, it is a promise to make a gift,
not a promise to enter into a bargain. Gift promises, especially between
family members, often are more loosely made, with less deliberation,
than promises to make commercial exchanges. This presents a problem
because it is sometimes harder to figure out if a gift promise was seriously made and should be seriously understood and because we don’t
want to encourage people to make gift promises lightly. Nor is a gift an
economically productive transaction. If the purpose of contract law is to
promote exchange so that resources will be used most productively, gift
promises are irrelevant. Perhaps the limited resources of contract law
should be saved for the enforcement of commercial promises.
This is the approach taken by the doctrine of consideration. The corollary of the principle that any promise supported by consideration is
enforceable is the rule that any promise not supported by consideration
is unenforceable. A promise to make a gift is given freely and seriously,
but because Uncle receives nothing in return for his promise, it is not
legally binding. We might argue that Uncle does receive something—the
psychic gratification he received from giving the gift. The law rejects that
idea, though, because of its focus on exchange; even if Uncle feels good
about helping out Nephew, Nephew has not given him that feeling in
exchange for the promise. (Note, however, that once Uncle actually gives
the car he cannot demand it back; although a promise to make a gift is
unenforceable under contract law, an executed gift is a binding transaction under property law.)
On the other hand, consider the law professor’s favorite, Hamer
v. Sidway (1891). In this case Uncle promised Nephew that he would
give Nephew $5,000 if Nephew refrained from smoking or drinking
until his twenty-first birthday. Uncle derives no economic value from
Nephew’s performance of his side of the bargain by abstaining, but that
doesn’t matter; the promise is still supported by consideration and therefore enforceable. If it was worth it for Uncle to make the deal, because
of his interest in his nephew’s health or moral fiber, then that is reason
enough for the court to enforce the exchange. Nor does it matter that
Nephew is physically helped and not harmed by performing; because he
gave something up, the resulting exchange is enforceable.
Consider some other traditional applications of the consideration doctrine. Two parties who have a contract modify its terms during the course
of performance. Under traditional consideration rules, the modification
Law 101
194
may be unenforceable. If an employer agrees to give a current employee
a higher salary or a lender agrees to forgive part of a debt, the promise
is unenforceable because it is not part of an exchange. The employer
or lender is not receiving anything in return for the new promise, because the employee is already legally obligated to work and the debtor to
repay the loan. The rule is called the preexisting duty rule: Performance
of a preexisting duty cannot be consideration for a new promise.
Or suppose the board of directors of a company informs a long-time
employee that, in recognition of her years of faithful service, the company
will pay her a lifetime pension whenever she chooses to retire. The employee, relieved at the promise of financial security, retires shortly thereafter. Inevitably, the company reneges. If the promise had been framed
differently (“If you retire, we will pay a pension”), there would have
been an exchange, but, as stated, the company’s promise is essentially
a promise to make a gift. Because the employee has promised or given
nothing in return, the promise is unenforceable for lack of consideration.
Consideration doctrine presents a crabbed view of human nature and
contracting practice. Everyone looks out for himself or herself; no one
gives up anything without getting something in return; only economically productive exchanges are worthwhile. The limitations of that view
make the results in each of these cases unpalatable. The preexisting duty
cases and the employee reliance case invalidate ordinary, understandable
commercial transactions.
The courts responded to these feelings about the consideration cases
by developing rules that avoided the harshness of the doctrine. At an
early stage of development these rules commonly took the form of manipulation or evasion of consideration doctrine to reach contrary results.
For example, if a debtor rendered some performance in addition to
repaying part of the debt—for example, he gave the lender $1,000 and a
handkerchief to settle a $2,000 debt—the preexisting duty rule was satisfied because the debtor had done more than render the performance to
which he was already obligated.
More recently, the courts have rejected consideration outright as a
requirement for enforcement. Some of the moves have been based on
fairness and public policy. A promise to make a gift to a charity is enforceable even though the donor receives nothing in return. Other rejections
of consideration have been based mostly in commercial reality. The
preexisting duty rule has been replaced by rules that enforce contract
modifications that are made in good faith or in light of circumstances
that were unanticipated at the time of contracting. And today the major
counterrule to consideration is the reliance principle. A promise unsupported by consideration is enforceable if the promisee reasonably relies
Contract Law
195
on it. When the long-time employee retires in reliance on the board’s
promise to pay her a pension, her retirement substitutes for consideration and validates the promise.
If a Contract Is Unfair, Can a Court Refuse to Enforce It?
This is a tough question for contract law. The emphasis on exchanges
prohibits the court from upsetting a bargain, no matter how unfair it
seems; the parties made the deal they wanted and now they are stuck
with it. But some contracts just stink. In extreme cases, the court has a
few other tools to avoid enforcing an unfair contract.
It is difficult to pin down what we mean by “unfair” in this context
and to give the court a precise formula for determining when a contract
is unfair. A court is supposed to decide each case according to a general
principle that governs like cases, so it can’t just go on a gut feeling that
one party made a terrible bargain. Courts have developed two guidelines
that suggest that a contract might need special scrutiny. First, there is
something suspicious about the agreement process by which the parties
arrived at their contract. The model of free contracting assumes two
independent, informed parties each negotiating a deal in his or her best
interest, but the process in a particular case doesn’t measure up to that
ideal in some important respect. Second, the resulting contract is too
one-sided. One party—typically the one who had the advantage in the
agreement process—ends up getting a lot more than seems justified in
the circumstances.
Both of these guidelines are extremely problematic. If they are applied
too generously, they will undermine the foundations of contract law. In
many contracts one party or the other will have the advantage in bargaining and will end up with a better deal because of superior knowledge, skill, or economic position; contracting often is about trying to
get the best deal possible. The tough question is where to draw the line
between fair and unfair advantage. We can see the difficulties by briefly
exploring two doctrines, duress and unconscionability.
The doctrine of duress allows a party to get out of a contract when
he was forced to enter into the contract by threats from the other party.
When the victim of a holdup agrees to give up his wallet to a robber or
a parent agrees to pay ransom to the kidnapper of her child in exchange
for the child’s safe return, the resulting contract is unenforceable because
it was entered into under duress. The same logic applies in a commercial
setting in which one party extorts contract terms from the other. In a famous case, a one-time creditor who no longer had a valid claim against
the debtor obtained a court order to seize the debtor’s ice wagon after
Law 101
196
it had been loaded with ice. The debtor had to agree to pay the invalid
claim or watch his business literally melt away, a payment that obviously
was induced by duress (Chandler v. Sanger, 1874).
Of course drawing the line between extortion and permissible economic pressure is extremely difficult. When Walmart uses its economic
muscle to get an advantageous price from a supplier, that’s just hard
negotiating and good business, not unreasonable bargaining that is the
equivalent of extortion. The doctrine of duress is reserved for cases in
which the contracting party has no reasonable alternative but to take the
deal that is offered and the deal is really one-sided, as is the case with the
victim of a holdup or the owner of the ice wagon.
Similarly, the doctrine of unconscionability allows a court to refuse
to enforce a deal in which one party had limited choices and poor bargaining position and the deal seems grossly unfair. In a famous case,
Ora Lee Williams, a low-income consumer in Washington, D.C., over a
period of five years had purchased furniture and other household items
on an installment plan from an inner-city furniture store. Each time she
signed a form contract that included the following credit term:
The amount of each periodical installment payment to be made by
purchaser to the Company under this present lease shall be inclusive
of and not in addition to the amount of each installment payment
to be made by purchaser under such prior leases, bills or accounts;
and all payments now and hereafter made by purchaser shall be
credited pro rata on all outstanding leases, bills and accounts due the
Company by purchaser at the time each such payment is made.
The effect of this obscure term was to keep a balance owing on every
item purchased until the entire balance for all items purchased had been
paid. When Williams defaulted on the payments for the last item she
purchased, a stereo set with a price of $515, the store invoked the contract term to reclaim the stereo and all the other items she had bought
over the last five years. The total price of those items was $1,800, of
which Williams had paid $1,400.
In Williams v. Walker-Thomas Furniture Co. (1965), the U.S. Court of
Appeals held that the credit term could not be enforced against Williams
if it was unconscionable. The court identified two elements of a transaction that could render it unconscionable. One element relates to the
agreement process:  “an absence of meaningful choice on the part of
one of the parties.” The other element relates to the substance of the
transaction: “contract terms which are unreasonably favorable to the
other party.” Because unconscionability depends on the particular facts
Contract Law
197
in each case, the appeals court instructed the trial court to go back and
see if these facts presented a case in which Williams lacked “meaningful
choice” in entering the contract because of her economic circumstances
and the legalese of the terms and whether the resulting deal was “unreasonably favorable” to the store.
This is a very sympathetic case for unconscionability: An exploitative
merchant gets a poor consumer to buy things she may not be able to
afford and then uses a contract chock-full of incomprehensible legalese
to take back all the merchandise when she misses a single payment.
But applying unconscionability in too many cases presents problems.
Choosing among limited and often unpalatable options is the essence of
contracting in a market economy. If Williams can’t afford to pay cash, is
it unfair for one of the few stores that is willing to extend her credit to
require her to acquiesce to tough terms that protect the store’s interest?
If we go too far in upsetting contracts like this, the courts will see many
more claims that contracts are unconscionable, and we may have to give
up on the basic notion that a deal is a deal. For that reason, courts have
been careful in striking down contract terms as unconscionable. Today
one of the most important uses of the doctrine is to evaluate oppressive
terms in standard-form contracts, particularly forced arbitration clauses
that limit consumers’ right to their day in court, which are discussed in
the next section.
How Does the Law Treat Form Contracts and Online Contracts?
Today some of the most important issues about contract formation, enforceability, and fairness arise in the most common type of contract—
a form contract, often called an adhesion contract (because one party
just adheres to it, without negotiating terms). A  form contract is a
standardized agreement prepared by the dominant party to a transaction for that and many similar transactions, containing standard terms
and usually presented to the other party on a take-it-or-leave-it basis.
Insurance policies, credit card agreements, employment contracts, website terms of service and privacy policies, and purchase contracts are
only some of the form contracts people encounter every day. If a friend
told you Law 101 is a wonderful book, you may have gone to Google
to learn more about the book; if so, you agreed to Google’s Terms of
Service (1,900 words) and Privacy Policy (2,900 words), both including
dozens of links to other documents. Among other things, you agreed to
let Google track your searches, place digital cookies on your computer,
and sell information about your online habits to other companies so ads
targeted to you pop up in the future. Then you went to Amazon.com
Law 101
198
to buy the book, agreeing to its Terms and Conditions (3,400 words).
By agreeing to those terms, you agreed that Amazon is not liable for
any kind of financial loss you might suffer from using the site or from
anything you bought on it. You may have used your Capital One credit
card (the contract for which spans eight pages of fine print). If you read
and understood your contracts with Google, Amazon, and Capital One,
you are in the minority; even Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts
admitted he doesn’t read the fine print of online contracts.
Form contracts are essential to a modern economy because they allow
large organizations to operate efficiently and reduce transaction costs
for everyone. But they can be problematic, because they allow a dominant party to impose its will when the contract terms are presented in
such a way that they are unlikely to be read or understood at the time
of contract and there is no opportunity for negotiation. Because form
contracts depart from contract law’s ideal of two independent parties
with full knowledge hammering out a deal, great controversy has arisen
as to how the law should respond to them. In Professor Charles Knapp’s
colorful terms, should form contracts be treated as “sacred cows” or as
“dangerous animals, likely to do harm unless confined and tamed”?
Courts apply the objective theory of contract formation and, in extreme cases, the doctrine of unconscionability to determine whether
form contracts and terms within them are valid. Under the objective
theory, the courts ask whether the party presented with a form contract has received adequate notice of the terms and has done something
that shows assent to it. If a buyer signs a form presented by a seller,
the seller can assume that the buyer has either read and agreed to the
terms presented in a form or has acquiesced to them without reading. In
situations in which that assumption is unrealistic, sometimes courts have
created exceptions. A driver who receives a claim check in a parking garage may not be held to expect that the back of the check includes a limitation of the garage’s liability for harm to the car, so no contract results.
Increasingly, however, courts have enforced even hidden terms. Eulala
Shute, on a seven-day Carnival cruise with her husband, slipped on a
deck mat during a guided tour of the ship’s galley and subsequently sued
Carnival for her injuries in federal court in Washington, her home state.
Carnival successfully moved to have the case thrown out, pointing to a
clause in the cruise contract requiring that all litigation be brought in
Florida, where it was headquartered. On appeal, the majority of the U.S.
Supreme Court felt no need to address whether the Shutes had actually
agreed to the clause, because the Shutes “were given notice of the forum
provision and, therefore, presumably retained the option of rejecting
the contract with impunity.” The “notice” of the provision was included
Contract Law
199
only in fine print as the eighth of twenty-five numbered paragraphs on
the ticket, a ticket they did not receive until after they had purchased
their cruise. Moreover, another of the terms stated that the price of the
cruise was nonrefundable, so even if the Shutes actually read the ticket
and understood its import, the only way they could avoid the forum selection clause would be to give up their vacation plans at the last minute
and forfeit the price they paid, or at least go to court in Florida from
their home in Washington in an attempt to get a refund (Carnival Cruise
Lines, Inc. v. Shute, 1991).
The Shute case is an example of a pay now, terms later contract, in
which the boilerplate terms in a contract are not presented until after
the transaction appears to have been completed. Courts differ on their
approaches to contracts like these. Some take an approach like that of
the court in the Shute case. In Hill v.  Gateway 2000 (1997), for example, Rich and Enza Hill called Gateway and ordered a computer
system, giving their credit card number in payment. When the delivery
arrived, the box included their new computer, the usual assortment
of cables and manuals, and a sheet of paper with a set of boilerplate
terms, including a statement that the Hills accepted the terms unless they
returned the computer within thirty days. When their computer did not
work some months later and Gateway would not repair it, they sued.
Gateway defended by pointing to another boilerplate term that stated
they had given up their right to sue Gateway and instead had to take any
claims to arbitration. Even though the arbitration clause had not been
presented when the Hills placed their order and Gateway accepted the
order, the court held that it became part of the contract when the Hills
failed to pack up their computer and ship it back (at their own expense),
as Gateway’s statement required. Other courts have reached different
results, holding that consumers are not bound by terms presented after
the contract has been made.
Online contracting has probably become the most pervasive form
of entering into contracts, through what are known as clickwrap and
browsewrap contracts. Clickwrap contracts arise when you click the “I
accept” box on a website. In browsewrap contracts, the terms of use
of the website are located somewhere on the site but the user does not
have to click an “I accept” box before proceeding. And there are infinite
variations depending on where the terms are located and what the user
has to do to indicate assent. In scrollwrap contracts some of the terms
are immediately visible but require scrolling down on the screen to read
all of them. In sign-in wrap contracts, terms are visible at the sign-in or
registration page for a website but the user does not have to specifically
click to indicate agreement to them.
Law 101
200
It is obvious that you are entering into a contract when making a
purchase on Amazon.com because you have to click a box indicating
that the transaction is complete. Most courts have held that clickwrap
agreements are enforceable. Whether you are presented with the terms
before accepting or given the option to go to another page of the website to read the terms first, you have been given notice of the terms and
have the opportunity to read the terms (although almost no one does)
and you have shown assent to the terms because if you don’t like them,
you don’t have to click the box to purchase the product. Browsewrap
agreements are more widespread because almost every commercial website has them, but they are more controversial. Even if you just look at
TMZ.com or Yahoo! News, the terms of agreement somewhere on the
site purport to control your use of the site. Courts have divided over the
enforceability of browsewrap agreements; how obvious it is from the design and language of the website that the user is agreeing to terms and
how readily the terms are accessible are key facts that move courts one
way or the other.
One of the most common provisions in standard forms is a mandatory arbitration clause. These clauses dictate that if problems arise
the consumer gives up the right to a day in court and require instead
that all disputes be referred to a specified form of private arbitration. In arbitration, one person or a panel of arbitrators, who are not
judges and may not even be lawyers, decide the case. Although the
arbitrators are supposed to follow the same rules of law as judges and
juries, their decision is not generally subject to review in court, even if
they get the facts or law wrong. Arbitration clauses are often paired
with a class action waiver, through which consumers give up the right
to participate in class action lawsuits, effectively barring them from
pursuing small claims altogether. Businesses prefer arbitration because it can reduce their litigation costs and shift cases away from
courts and juries to a forum of their choosing that they expect will
be more congenial.
The U.S. Supreme Court has broadly interpreted the Federal
Arbitration Act to preempt state law that limits the scope of arbitration
clauses and therefore to make many arbitration clauses enforceable.
Judicial decisions and state law prohibitions on class action waivers,
rules that require waiver of the right to a day in court to be explicit, and
a prohibition on arbitration of personal injury claims in nursing home
contracts are among the rules held to be invalid under this approach.
But arbitration clauses can be held to be unenforceable under the doctrine of unconscionability. Zenia Chavarria was hired as a deli clerk at a
Contract Law
201
Ralph’s Grocery store. Subsequently she sued Ralph’s on behalf of herself and other workers for failing to pay for overtime and meal breaks
as required by California law. The company pointed to a mandatory
arbitration clause and class action waiver—its “Mediation & Binding
Arbitration Policy” referred to but not included in its employment application, one of twenty-two different forms and manuals Chavarria
had received at a new employee orientation. The court held that the
policy was procedurally unconscionable as a take-it-or-leave-it contract
that Chavarria had to agree to but could not review before she was
hired. The policy also was substantively unconscionable because it always allowed Ralph’s to pick the arbitrator, who is likely not to be
neutral, and allowed the arbitrator to split the costs between the parties
regardless of who won. Typical fees would be $7,000 to $14,000 per
day, which would likely be more than the value of Chavarria’s claim
and would make it impossible for many employees to hold Ralph’s
responsible for violations of the law (Chavarria v.  Ralph’s Grocery
Company, 2015).
Given how ubiquitous form contracting is, relatively few judicial
opinions explore its contract law dimensions. In consumer cases the
stakes are typically too small and the costs of litigation too high, and
arbitration clauses and class action waivers bar much litigation. Outside
of traditional contract law, however, federal and state law regulate
many elements of form contracts. There are two approaches to regulation. The first approach regulates how terms in form contracts must be
disclosed, requiring the party presenting the form to try to make clear its
essential terms. Plain language laws require sellers and lenders to write
contracts in plain language, without legalese, using short sentences and
paragraphs, and in readable type. Laws regulating credit cards require
standard-form disclosures of interest rates and fees. Disclosure regulation aims to improve the process of contracting by giving consumers
better information about their deals, but it often fails because more disclosure becomes too much disclosure, overwhelming consumers, and
no matter how clear or prominent the terms, consumers often won’t
pay attention to them. Therefore, the second approach is direct regulation of the terms of form contracts. Federal law limits when and why
credit card companies can increase interest rates, and state laws prohibit
product sellers from including in sales contracts a term saying the seller
is not liable if the buyer is injured because of a defect in the product.
Direct regulation is more effective than disclosure regulation but limited
in scope; form contracting takes myriad forms and direct regulation only
addresses specific problems.
Law 101
202
Once You Make a Contract, Can You Ever Get Out of It?
The easiest way to get out of a contract is to have the other party let
you out. Even though the other party may have a legal right to have
you perform the contract, she may not insist that you perform. Most
people in business are reasonable and understanding. They want to do
the right thing, which is not always to pursue their legal rights to the
full extent. In many settings people would say it is not nice to make the
other person do something he doesn’t want to do. In addition, many
contracts arise out of long-term relationships, and it may be more important to preserve the relationship than to obtain the benefit of a single
performance. Often it may not be worthwhile to make a federal case
out of a small contract.
Someone who has made a contract can invoke the law in a number of
ways to get out of it, too. We have already seen that many agreements
are not enforceable because of a defect in the agreement process or a
doctrine such as duress or unconscionability. In addition, one party to a
contract may be excused from performance because of a mistake in the
formation of the contract, because his performance has become impossible, or because a condition of his duty to perform has failed to occur.
Many contracts involve a prediction about the future, but the prediction may turn out to be wrong. An investor contracts to buy a company’s
stock in the expectation that the company’s business will expand and the
price of the stock will go up. If the investor is mistaken and the value of
the stock plummets, she can hardly get out of the deal (or undo it, if the
transaction has already been consummated) because of her mistake. The
possibility that the stock price might fall is one of the risks that she took
in entering into the contract, and the law will not relieve her of that risk
because of her mistake.
Sometimes, though, the mistake doesn’t involve one of the risks the
parties were bargaining about. Suppose a contractor, in preparing a bid
on a construction job, makes a clerical error in figuring the cost of the
materials needed at $1,000 instead of $11,000. The contractor submits
a bid for $15,000 instead of $25,000 and the owner accepts the bid. If
the contractor discovers the error immediately, courts would be inclined
to let him out of the contract because of the mistake. The owner is not
much prejudiced by letting the contractor out if the mistake is discovered
right away, compared to the burden on the contractor of performing at
the lower price, and the owner should be aware of the mistake if the
other bids come in around $25,000. On the other hand, if the contractor
makes an error in judgment—predicting it will take two weeks to do the
job when it actually takes a month—the court will not excuse him. The
Contract Law
203
contractor takes the risk that the job will take longer than two weeks
when he makes his bid on that assumption at a fixed price.
Sometimes the mistakes parties make concern the state of facts at
the time the contract is made rather than predictions about the future
performance. This is what happened in one of the great cases of contract law, Sherwood v. Walker (1887), the “barren cow” case. The buyer,
wanting to buy some Angus cattle, contacted the seller, who had some
cattle on his farm. The seller warned the buyer that in all probability
the cows were sterile and would not breed. The buyer picked out a cow
named Rose 2d of Aberlone, and they agreed on a price of 5.5 cents per
pound, on the assumption that the cow was incapable of breeding so her
only value would be as beef. When the buyer tendered $80 after the cow
was weighed, the seller refused to turn her over, because he had discovered that Rose was bearing a calf, making her value as a breeder between
$750 and $1,000. The court said the seller did not have to go through
with the deal because the parties had been mistaken about the substance
of what they were buying and selling.
The decision in Sherwood v. Walker is based on the concept of the
risks of the contract. Surely the buyer and seller knew they were bargaining with respect to a particular cow, Rose 2d, but they were bargaining about her on the assumption that she was useful only for
butchering and not breeding. Their mistake about her condition went
to a basic assumption of the contract, would have a significant effect on
the value of the contract, and was not a risk that either of them took,
because (the court assumed) they were both sure she could not breed.
When the assumption outside the risks of the contract turned out to
be incorrect, the seller could get out of the contract. The case would
have been different if one of the risks of the contract had been whether
the cow could breed, with the buyer thinking she might and the seller
guessing she probably wouldn’t. Then they both would be stuck with the
deal whichever way things turned out.
The concept of the risks of the contract extends to another class of
excuse cases involving what are known as impossibility and frustration.
Sometimes the performance that a party has promised to render is impossible to achieve when the time comes. In the classic case of Taylor
v. Caldwell (1863), for example, the owner of a music hall had agreed
to rent it out to a local promoter for a series of concerts over four days.
Between the time they made the agreement and the time scheduled for
the performances, the music hall burned down. The promoter asked for
damages because the owner of the hall couldn’t make the music hall
available for use on the days promised. The owner of the hall responded
that he should be relieved of his contractual obligation because the
Law 101
204
performance had become impossible; he could not make the music hall
available when it no longer existed.
This is an appealing argument; if you cannot do something, how can
you be held responsible for failing to do it? Note, however, that there are
several intermediate steps we need to take to reach that conclusion. The
owner cannot provide the hall, but that does not mean that he cannot
be held liable for damages for failing to do what he promised to do.
The issue is whether he should be relieved from liability, not whether he
should be compelled to do the impossible.
Courts resolve this issue exactly the way they resolve other contract
law issues. When the parties have not clearly said what should happen
if the music hall burns down, the court has to determine what they intended, which really means what they reasonably should have intended,
which really means what is the fair result given the court’s views of what
parties ordinarily do and should expect in this context. Following this
analysis, courts generally conclude that impossibility of performance
does constitute the kind of excuse that lets a person out of a contract,
so the music hall owner, for example, doesn’t have to pay damages for
failing to have the hall available for the promoter’s use.
There is a parallel doctrine from the other side of the contract, known
as frustration of purpose. In 1902 a great procession was scheduled
in London to mark the coronation of Edward VII as King of England.
Owners of apartments along the parade route rented out their rooms to
prospective spectators at rates much higher than the normal rental value.
Unfortunately, Edward became ill and the coronation was postponed.
The persons who had taken the rooms in anticipation of the procession
sought to be excused from their contracts. Their performance was neither impossible nor impracticable. It was perfectly possible for them to
pay the money and sit in the rooms on the appointed date. What had
happened, though, was that their purpose in entering into the contract
had been frustrated; although they could rent the rooms, they could not
use them to watch the now nonexistent procession. The court granted
an excuse in this circumstance, for the same reason that an impossible
performance is excused. The court determined that postponement of the
coronation was not one of the risks that the renter should bear under the
reasonable understanding of the contract.
What Happens if One Party’s Performance Depends on Something
Happening and It Doesn’t Happen?
The most common way to get an excuse for not performing a contract is
because you have a duty to perform that arises only if something happens
Contract Law
205
and the something never happens. Lawyers call the something a condition of your duty. Returning to Hamer v. Sidway, suppose Uncle promises
to give Nephew $5,000 if Nephew refrains from smoking and drinking
until his twenty-first birthday. At Nephew’s twenty-first birthday party,
he tells Uncle that he has been hitting the bottle and smoking a pack
a day, but he wants the money anyway. Is Uncle obligated to give it to
him? Of course not. Uncle’s promise to give $5,000 was conditional on
its face: If you refrain from smoking and drinking, then I will give you
the money. Because the condition of Uncle’s duty to pay never occurred,
he is not obligated to follow through. This follows even though Nephew
never promised to refrain. Because Nephew never promised to refrain,
Uncle can’t sue him—a condition is different from a promise—but unless
the condition comes about, Nephew can’t collect on Uncle’s promise.
That was an easy case because the terms of the promise expressly
stated that it was conditional. Suppose instead that Uncle agrees to sell
and Nephew agrees to buy Uncle’s car for $5,000. Nephew shows up at
the appointed time and place, informs Uncle that he still wants the car
but doesn’t want to pay for it, demands the keys and title, and says he
will sue if Uncle doesn’t hand them over. Can Nephew sue for the car?
This case is as easy as the first one. Even though the agreement did not
expressly state that Uncle has to deliver the car only if Nephew pays, we
are sure that is the right result. How do we know that? Here we use the
same process of constructing the meaning of the promises that we used
to determine if there were promises at all, when we considered contract
formation. It would be unreasonable to allow Nephew to get the car
and leave Uncle with nothing but a lawsuit for the price, so Nephew has
to fulfill the implied condition of Uncle’s promise—coming up with the
money—before he is entitled to the car. In this case, the condition is also
a promise; if Nephew doesn’t pay, Uncle can refuse to turn over the car
(because the condition of his duty to do so has failed to occur) and sue
Nephew for breach (because Nephew has broken his promise to pay for
the car).
This does create a dilemma though. Presumably the condition runs in
the other direction, too. Nephew is not required to pay the money unless
Uncle gives him the car; Nephew is buying a car, not a lawsuit. We can
end up with the absurd situation of Uncle holding the keys and Nephew
holding the cash, each demanding that the other perform before he will
perform. Are both in breach for failing to perform, or is neither in breach
because the condition of his performance has not occurred? Here again
we have to use our experience and judgment to construct a reasonable
solution. Uncle does not actually have to give Nephew the keys before
the condition of Nephew’s duty to pay has occurred. If he did, Nephew
Law 101
206
might drive off without paying. Instead, Uncle only has to tender performance, by showing he is ready, willing, and able to perform, and
Nephew has to do the same.
Many contracts contain conditions that do not depend on the performance of the other party. An insurance policy is an everyday example.
The insurance company promises to pay on a homeowner’s policy for
damage to the insured’s house if the house is damaged. If the house is
never damaged, the condition of the company’s duty never arises, so the
company never has to pay.
When the court decides that a contractual duty is conditional, must
the condition be fully met before the duty becomes binding? In some
cases, certainly; if Nephew only has $2,000 of the $5,000 price, he can’t
demand the keys to the car. But in other cases conditions can be satisfied
by something other than strict performance. Consider Jacob & Youngs,
Inc. v. Kent (1921), an opinion by the great judge Benjamin Cardozo.
Kent hired Jacob & Youngs, Inc., a construction company, to build his
custom-designed country residence. The construction contract specified
in detail how the house was to be built, including a requirement that
the cast iron pipe used for part of the plumbing be “of Reading manufacture” (made by the Reading Pipe Company, a reliable manufacturer).
When construction was almost finished, Kent learned that Jacob &
Youngs had used some pipe manufactured by the Cohoes Company instead of Reading pipe. Kent’s architect ordered Jacob & Youngs to tear
the offending pipe out of the walls and replace it with Reading pipe,
even though the two were of identical quality.
Most reasonable homeowners would have excused Jacob & Young’s
failure of condition by not insisting on strict performance. Kent, however, was known as a man who would “chase all over town for a dollar,”
so he pointed to the contract and demanded strict performance, regardless of the expense, or else he would not pay Jacob & Youngs the amount
he still owed on the contract.
This is an intriguing case. Jacob & Youngs has not performed; does
its failure to perform operate as a failure of condition in the same way
that Nephew’s failure to tender the price of the car does? It seems unfair
to make the builder do a lot of useless work in replacing the perfectly
functional Cohoes pipe with Reading pipe. (And we suspect that Kent
anticipates that the contractor won’t do it, so Kent can keep whatever
payments he still has to make under the contract and do nothing about
the pipe.) On the other hand, the parties have made a deal that specified
Reading pipe, and a deal is a deal.
But what was the deal? Here the court decided that the deal was not
that Jacob & Youngs had to build the building exactly as specified in
Contract Law
207
order to be paid but only that it build substantially in accordance with
the plans. Minor deviations, like a difference in pipe that has no functional effect, don’t matter; the builder is still entitled to be paid. If Jacob
& Youngs leaves the house half-finished, it may not get anything on the
contract, but if it does nearly all of the work, Kent has to pay. As Judge
Cardozo wrote in this case,
Those who think more of symmetry and logic in the development
of legal rules than of practical adaptation to the attainment of a just
result will be troubled by a classification where the lines of division
are so wavering and blurred. Something, doubtless, may be said on
the score of consistency and certainty in favor of a stricter standard.
The courts have balanced such considerations against those of equity
and fairness, and found the latter to be weightier.
A related issue concerns conditions of satisfaction. Suppose Kent
hires an interior decorator to prepare a plan for decorating the country
residence. Kent is fussy, so he promises to pay the decorator twice her
normal hourly fee if he likes the design and nothing if he doesn’t. The
decorator works furiously and comes up with a plan that wins prizes
and is applauded by art critics and other designers. Unfortunately, Kent
hates it and refuses to pay. Will we say that the design is much like
pipe—everyone else agrees it is good so the owner should be satisfied,
too? Not here. Satisfaction with pipe ought to be based on purely functional characteristics, but satisfaction with an artistic design is personal.
Kent’s freedom to make a deal on his terms leads the court to conclude
that if Kent really does not like the design, the condition of his duty to
pay has failed to occur. (Kent really has to not like the design, though;
he can’t use his purported dissatisfaction to get out of the contract for
some other reason.)
Will a Court Order Someone to Perform a Contract?
If someone doesn’t do what she has promised to do, she is in breach
of contract. One common consequence of breach is that the other
party does not have to perform its side of the bargain. One party’s
breach constitutes a failure of a condition of the other party’s duty
to perform, as when Uncle doesn’t have to hand over the keys to the
car if Nephew refuses to pay. Not being required to perform and perhaps being able to keep part of the other party’s performance (such
as a down payment) is often the greatest advantage that a contracting
party can have.
Law 101
208
The other consequence of breach is that the injured party is entitled
to a legal remedy for breach of contract. We might think that the injured party should be able to demand that the other party perform, by
delivering the goods or performing the job that was promised. Ordering
the breaching party to perform would affirm the importance of keeping
one’s promises and make sure that the other party is not harmed by the
breach.
In contract law, however, ordering the other party to perform (called
specific performance) is an exceptional remedy that is ordered only in
unusual cases. Ordinarily, the injured party is entitled only to money
damages as a substitute for the promised performance, not the actual
performance itself.
There are three reasons that courts treat specific performance as an
extraordinary remedy. The first and probably most important is historical. Money damages were the usual remedy in law courts. Ordering
someone to do something as a remedy was generally available only in
equity courts. As a result of the political conflict between the law courts
and equity courts, equitable remedies such as specific performance became regarded as exceptional. (See Chapter 4.)
The second reason is practical. In many cases it would be difficult
for the court to order someone to do something and then to determine
whether he or she has complied. If the contract requires a builder to
construct a house, some of the terms of performance will be easy to
determine—whether the house meets the physical dimensions described
in the plans—but many of the other terms will be difficult to supervise—
whether the carpentry has been done in “a workmanlike manner.” The
court does not want to have to supervise a complex performance and
listen to the parties as they repeatedly run into court to complain about
some aspect of it.
The third reason is conceptual. The basic principle of contract
remedies is that the typical contract has a monetary value. Contract law
serves to protect people who rely on promises, but they can be adequately protected by giving them the monetary equivalent of the performance promised to them instead of the actual performance itself.
Money damages are thought to be as good as performance because the
injured party can use the money to procure a substitute on the market.
If the contract is to build a house and the builder refuses to perform, the
owner can hire another builder and sue the builder for the higher cost,
if any; if the owner breaches, the builder can get the profit it would have
made on the job.
The principle that money damages are an adequate substitute for a
contractual performance is so strong that there are very few exceptions
Contract Law
209
to it. Only where money damages cannot substitute for the performance
is the injured party entitled to specific performance of the contract. This
usually occurs only when the item sold is unique so that no market substitute is available. If a buyer contracts to buy a new Cadillac from a
GM dealer and the dealer breaches, the buyer is not entitled to specific
performance because she can get an identical car elsewhere. If a buyer
contracts to buy a used 2014 Cadillac and the seller breaches, it may be
hard to find the exact model in the same condition elsewhere, but even
then the court will say that money damages are enough because the
buyer should be able to get a similar car. However, if the buyer contracts
to buy a 1966 gold Cadillac driven by Elvis Presley, she will be entitled
to specific performance. Elvis’s Cadillac is unique, so no damage remedy
can make up for the loss.
How Much Does Someone Have to Pay for Not Keeping a Promise?
Contracts are enforceable because people expect that someone who
makes a promise will carry through on it. When the promise is broken,
the injured party’s expectation is the usual measure of contract damages.
Take a simple example. A  farmer agrees to sell a truckload of
pumpkins to the owner of a roadside produce stand for $100. When
the farmer fails to deliver the pumpkins, the stand owner buys a substitute truckload from another farmer for $120. The owner expected
to have paid $100 to receive a truckload of pumpkins, so requiring
the breaching farmer to pay $20 damages would satisfy that expectation. If the owner buys substitute pumpkins for $100 or less, the
farmer owes nothing, because the owner is in as good a position as if
the farmer’s promise had been performed even without the payment
of damages.
Similarly, if the stand owner refuses to take the pumpkins and the
farmer resells them for $90, the owner should pay $10 to put the farmer
where he would have been if the promise had been performed:  no
pumpkins in his truck and $100 in his pocket. If the pumpkin market
doesn’t fall and the farmer resells for $100 or more, the stand owner
owes nothing.
In all of these cases we assume that the injured party has no expenses
in either buying substitute pumpkins or reselling the pumpkins that
were contracted for. If there are such expenses, they will be added to the
damages. If, for example, the farmer has to truck the pumpkins some
distance to resell them after the stand owner’s breach, the farmer could
recover the cost of transportation; if he cannot recover those costs, his
expectation from the contract has not been fully satisfied.
Law 101
210
Suppose when the farmer breaches the stand owner doesn’t buy any
substitute pumpkins. The law says he is still entitled to his damages,
measured by what he would have paid for substitute pumpkins. If the
market price has risen to $120 per truckload, the owner is entitled to
$20 even though he does not have any tangible loss. Contract remedies
are based on the expectation of performance, not actions actually taken
in reliance on the expectation of performance. The reasons for this are
obscure, but it has something to do with the difficulty in many situations
of proving that one actually relied on a specific contract. If the buyer is
not the owner of a small roadside stand but Libby’s, buying thousands
of truckloads of pumpkins to process into pie filling, it would be hard
to link a particular broken contract and a particular substitute, but we
imagine there must be a loss there anyway.
Contract law imposes some limitations on expectation damages. One
is that damages must be foreseeable. Suppose the pumpkin contract
called for delivery on October 15 and the stand owner had made special
arrangements to resell the pumpkins at a premium to school groups to
make into jack-o’-lanterns for Halloween. When the farmer fails to deliver, it is too late for the stand owner to get pumpkins from anywhere
else, so he loses more than the ordinary resale markup for pumpkins.
Here the owner’s expectation is higher than usual, and the issue is which
party should bear the burden of this loss. The owner will point to his
expectation of higher profit, but the farmer will respond that he did not
know about the special arrangements. The law states that only where the
farmer knows or reasonably should know of the owner’s special loss will
he be liable for it. This provides an interesting contrast with the tort law
damage rules, under which the party causing the harm is responsible for
all the consequences, foreseeable or not, because fault is more important
in tort than in contract law.
A second limitation is that the nonbreaching party cannot recover
damages that it could have avoided through reasonable efforts. This rule
operates most frequently in employment cases. If a corporate executive
is fired with six months remaining on her employment contract, can she
just sit home watching reality television shows and drinking margaritas
while collecting her salary? Not necessarily. If she does not look for another job or take a comparable job if one is offered, her damages will be
reduced by what her former employer can prove she could have earned
in the substitute employment. The standard is reasonableness; she is not
required to move across the country to take a position, nor does she
have to take a minimum-wage job at McDonald’s.
A third limitation is that damages must be proven with reasonable
certainty. This limitation can be particularly troublesome in the case of
Contract Law
211
new businesses. Suppose an entrepreneur plans on opening a new restaurant on March 1, but the opening is delayed for two months because the
kitchen equipment supplier fails to deliver the ranges and refrigerators
on time. The entrepreneur may have difficulty proving with reasonable
certainty what the restaurant’s profit would have been during those two
months; the patronage of a new restaurant is highly speculative, and it is
hard to draw inferences from the experience of other restaurants.
This hypothetical suggests the need for other types of remedies to supplement expectation damages. Reliance damages are awarded when expectation damages are unavailable, to compensate the injured party for
expenses incurred in reliance on a contract. The restaurant owner may
not be able to recover for lost profits, but if she has spent hundreds of
dollars buying newspaper advertising and printing invitations for the
March 1 opening, those expenses are wasted and the supplier is liable
for them as reliance damages. Restitution damages are the recovery of
benefits conferred on the other party. If the owner cancels the contract
with the supplier and gets equipment elsewhere, the owner is entitled to
get back the down payment made to the supplier.
If the contract damage rules worked really well, people would
seldom break their promises. Unless someone could get a much better
deal by breaking a contract and going elsewhere, it just wouldn’t pay
once the breaching party had paid the other party’s damages. But contract damage rules don’t work very well. Aside from the foreseeability,
avoidability, and certainty limitations on expectation damages, it costs
money to get damages. The injured party has to hire a lawyer and pay
litigation expenses to recover the damages. These costs are also damages
caused by the broken promise, but they are not recoverable as contract
damages. So if the injured party has a loss of $10,000 she might have to
pay $2,000 in attorney’s fees and other expenses to get it back, meaning
she has been undercompensated to that extent. It also takes time and
aggravation to litigate, and the financial and psychic burden cannot be
recovered either. Therefore, many valid breach of contract cases are not
worth pursuing.
From a different direction, though, recall that contract remedies,
like the liability rules of contract law, are residual. The threat of legal
remedies is not as important in deterring people from breaking their
promises as are other factors. People will avoid breaking their promises
because they think that it is wrong to do so. Other people may think
badly of them if they do, and reputation is a valuable commodity in
business. Their contracting partner may refuse to deal with them in the
future if they breach. So contract remedies, like the rest of contract law,
are only part of the story.

7
You Are What You Own
Property Law
The fundamental principle of property law seems obvious: If you own
something it’s yours, and you can do what you want with it. But more
than any other subject, property law is burdened with a thousand years
of legal history and a plethora of technical distinctions. Did you know
you probably own your house in fee simple absolute—unless you have
a fee simple subject to an executory limitation? And if you plan to leave
property to your grandchildren, do you need to be concerned about the
Rule Against Perpetuities? Both of these vestiges of feudalism, and many
others, still have bite in the modern day.
At the same time, property law concerns issues of great social policy
and cutting-edge technology. Should the government be able to construct
dunes to prevent beach erosion even if the dunes block the ocean view of
beachfront homes? If a research physician develops a commercially valuable product from a patient’s cancer cells, who owns the rights to the
product—the physician or the patient? Can a music fan make a mash-up
video and post it to YouTube? If so, who owns the rights to the video?
This chapter begins with some basic principles and then examines
some of the most important issues in property law from medieval times
to the present. The subject is so large that we can only hit some highlights.
What Is Property Law?
People in our culture have an intuitive notion of what property is, and
part of the task of this chapter is to explore the extent to which the
law’s idea of property differs from that intuitive notion. Let’s begin with
intuitions about property, which we can see from the ideas children absorb from their parents.
A small child has a very clear concept of property:  “Mine!” Little
Suzie’s toy, doll, or favorite blanket is her property. Implicit in “mine” is
Law 101
214
a concept of ownership, the same concept of ownership that her parents
may have about their house, car, or investment accounts, which are
other examples of property. The core of this concept is what Sir William
Blackstone, author of the definitive eighteenth-century treatise on English
law, called “sole and despotic dominion . . . over . . . things . . . in total exclusion of the right of any other individual in the universe.” Ownership,
or dominion, is the ability to control the use of the property. Suzie can
pretend that her doll is a guest at a tea party, a superhero, or her mother
going off to work, just as her parents can paint their house orange, put
their bed in the dining room, or hang posters of Adolf Hitler on the
walls. She can allow a friend to play with her doll, or she can prevent
her friend from playing with it, just as her parents can invite neighbors
over or keep them out. She can give it to her friend for keeps, she can
trade with her friend for a different toy, or she can refuse to do so, just
as her parents can sell their house at any price they can get or keep it for
themselves.
In our culture, this concept of the ownership of things has been central
to the idea of property. Property law concerns the different things people
can own and the ways in which they can own them. Both elements of the
concept—things as the subject of property law and absolute ownership—
are deficient, however, and property law is more diffuse.
Think first about things, or the subject matter of property. Suzie’s
doll and her parents’ house are things that can be someone’s property.
Almost anything tangible can be the subject matter of property. We have
to say “almost,” because whether some tangible things can be property
is controversial. Suzie “belongs” to her parents, but she is not their property. (This shows that definitions of property change; if Suzie is African
American, prior to the Civil War she could have been someone’s property.) What about Suzie’s father’s kidneys? They are property in the
sense that no one else can take them away, but are they property in the
sense that he could sell one to someone who needs a transplant? (In Iran
the answer is yes; in other countries, the answer is no, at least to date.)
Property isn’t limited to tangible things either. If Suzie’s father is an
author, he has a copyright in the novels he writes. This is an intangible
form of intellectual property; he doesn’t own the books, but he does own
the right to produce the books. Suzie’s parents also may own stocks,
bonds, and mutual fund shares. Financial instruments like these are the
most prevalent form of property in our society, even though they are
intangible.
Once the law goes down the path of recognizing intangible property
interests, the core conception of property as involving “things” comes
Property Law
215
apart. Does an employee have a property right in her job? Is the right to
receive or maintain government benefits or privileges, like a television
broadcast license, property? Is every kind of privilege or entitlement potentially the subject of property?
The move from tangible to intangible property presents a problem
for property law. If property cannot be confined to things, then what
is the scope of property law? If it extends to every potentially valuable resource, then everything is subject to property law. But if everything is part of property, then there is nothing really special about
property law.
Raising these questions also illustrates the deficiency of the second element of property, the concept of absolute ownership. Suzie’s parents own
their house, but the ownership falls far short of Blackstone’s conception
of absolute dominion. They cannot use their property for anything they
want. If they want to put a store on the property, local zoning regulations
may prevent it. If they host loud parties or leave garbage piled on the
lawn, the neighbors or local officials may bring legal action to stop them.
Nor can they prevent all others from using the property. They own the
sidewalk in front of their house, but they cannot exclude pedestrians
from using the sidewalk. And others may have ownership interests in the
property, too. When they borrowed money to buy the house, they gave
the bank a contract right (a promise to repay the money) and a property
interest (the mortgage that secures the loan).
When we put together the extension of property to intangibles and
the collapse of the idea of absolute ownership, we see that property
is not really about the ownership of things. Instead, property is about
relationships among people with respect to valuable resources. Those
relationships are not defined by Blackstone’s—or Suzie’s—concept of
absolute ownership but instead vary depending on the context. Property
law is often described as involving a bundle of rights; no single concept
of ownership prevails. Instead, there are a variety of legal relationships
that people can have with respect to valuable interests.
The bundle of potential rights defines what interests an owner can
have in an item of property. Think of the bundle of rights as a bundle of
sticks. If an individual is holding all of the sticks with respect to a certain
subject of property, tangible or intangible, then we think of that person
as the owner of the property. Even if they do not hold all of the sticks, if
they hold most of them, or some particularly important sticks, we might
still think of them as owning the property. Here are the most important
sticks, or interests in property that one might have. Because property is
not absolute, all of these are subject to limitation.
Law 101
216
• Liberty to use. Suzie’s parents can do pretty much what they want
with their house without anyone else’s permission.
• Right to exclude. No one else has a right to use the house unless
Suzie’s parents let them.
• Power to transfer. Suzie’s parents can sell or give away the house.
They also can determine what happens to it upon their deaths, by
leaving it in their wills to Suzie or to the SPCA.
• Immunity from damage. Just as no one else can use the property,
no one else has a legal power to damage the property. If a neighbor
chops down his own tree and it falls through their roof, Suzie’s
parents can recover money damages from the neighbor for the cost of
repairing the roof.
The extent to which property law is relational rather than absolute
is evident by looking at a few examples of the ways in which one
of these fundamental interests is defined and limited. Often the most
important of the bundle of rights is the right to exclude others from
the use of one’s property. Some aspects of the right to exclude are obvious; a homeless person can’t come sleep in your living room without
permission. Any entry upon your land without your permission or
without a legal privilege to enter is a trespass. If someone drives across
your land, throws garbage on it, or even walks a dog on your lawn,
it technically is a trespass. Traditionally, a landowner was thought to
own not only the surface of the land but also all property extending
down to the center of the earth and up “to the heavens.” The former
is still true; your neighbor cannot dig a tunnel under your land or dig
diagonally to extract minerals under your land. The latter concept has
been eroded, however; it is not a trespass for an airplane to fly over
your house at 30,000 feet, or for a satellite to orbit the Earth above
your property.
Some entries on other people’s land are privileged, though, and therefore are not trespasses. For example, the seller of a house has a reasonable time after the sale to remove items that have been left there, unless
the parties have agreed that all of the seller’s property will be removed
before the sale. Public officials such as the police, firefighters, and health
inspectors can enter property under some circumstances to protect the
public safety. If Suzie’s parents operate a business on their property,
antidiscrimination laws prevent them from excluding customers on the
grounds of race.
Property Law
217
Suppose there is not a physical invasion of the property but some
other type of entry. Does a property owner have the right to exclude
noise, smells, smoke, or vibrations? If you live near a fertilizer plant and
the plant emits unpleasant odors and occasionally dust that settles on
your land, have your property rights been invaded? The law’s answer is
yes, if the infringement on your enjoyment of your property is deemed to
be unreasonable. These invasions of your property are called nuisances.
They also may violate local ordinances or state law specifically directed
at these kinds of problems.
The tricky part, of course, is figuring out when something like dust,
odors, or noise are unreasonable. Think about noises that might constitute nuisances: Your neighbor’s kid practicing the piano (badly) for
an hour after school? The kid’s teenage brother’s rock band practicing
at full volume for an hour after school? For three hours? At midnight?
As you can see, there are judgment calls to be made here. The court
will look at the kind of invasion, when, where, and how frequently it
occurs, and how much impact it has on the enjoyment and economic
value of your property in deciding whether to label a certain activity a
nuisance. These judgment calls are part of the courts’ task of defining the
relationships that constitute the law of property.
So property law is not about things, or even in a simple sense about
the ownership of things. Instead, property law—like all other law—is
about the allocation of value in society. It is inevitably tied to questions
about economics, politics, and our vision of the good society. We need
to explore, then, what qualifies as property, what it means to say something is property, and how the answers to those questions tie in to social
relations, power, and justice.
Why Do We Need Property Law?
The first question, as with any body of law, is why do we need property
law at all? In particular, why do we need a system of private property
and what does it do for us? What would be wrong if instead everybody
“owned” everything in common, or if there were no legally enforceable
rights to own anything?
Lawyers, judges, and scholars have grappled with these questions from
the time of Blackstone and John Locke to the present. The answers are
not entirely satisfactory, and this lack of clarity is one source of the confusion in the law. Here we focus on three types of arguments that have
dominated the debate over property: First, property encourages productive activity. Second, property protects political liberty. Third, property
contributes to human flourishing.
Law 101
218
Property arguably encourages people to engage in productive activity
by providing them some security in knowing that their property will be
protected and by creating a system in which property can be transferred
to those people who will use it most effectively. The same parables have
been used from the time of Blackstone to modern law and economics
scholars to illustrate the point. Suppose you decide to grow crops on a
piece of land. You till the soil, plant seeds, and water and fertilize your
crops. When the day comes for your crops to be harvested, however, you
find that your neighbor has been there the night before and has taken
for himself all of the food you have grown. If you don’t have a legally
enforceable property right in the crops, your only recourse is to use force
against your neighbor, which you may not be inclined to do if he is
bigger and stronger than you are. In the future, you won’t have much of
an incentive to work hard growing crops if you won’t be able to enjoy
the fruits of your labor.
Suppose also that you are not a very good farmer, compared to some
of your neighbors. You can only produce 100 bushels a year of corn on
the land, while a better farmer could produce 200 bushels. If you can
sell your land to your neighbor, or sell the right to use the land to grow
corn, you and your neighbor both will be better off. But you cannot do
so unless you have property rights in the land, to use it exclusively and
to transfer the right to use.
In short, property law serves an economic function. If people have
legal protection for the use of property, the legal ability to exclude
others from using it, and the capacity to transfer property to others,
they are more likely to invest labor and capital in the development
of resources, and resources will flow to the hands of those who can
use them most effectively. These consequences benefit the individuals
who use resources and they benefit society as a whole because, as
the economists say, they encourage people to put resources to their
“highest and best use.”
Whether private property really does encourage productive activity
in these ways depends on the validity of the implicit assumptions underlying the economic argument. Many books have been devoted to
examining these economic arguments, and they cannot be explored in
depth here. Consider, however, that the economic argument translates a
theoretical analysis into a broad empirical assumption: that a person will
do anything not prohibited by law, and that a person will only do things
protected by law. It is not necessarily true that the strong will steal from
the weak, nor that farmers will farm only to the extent that they have
legal protection for their efforts. In both instances, social constraints or
different perceptions of self-interest and community interest may cause
Property Law
219
people to act in ways that the economic argument does not predict.
Anthropologists have described many societies and situations in which
collective ownership of resources rather than private property was economically productive.
Moreover, today the debate about the economic function of private
property takes on a different form when considering intellectual property
in electronic form, such as movies, music, and online content. Providing
strong protection may encourage producers to create more such content—
rock groups will record more songs and recording companies and iTunes
will distribute more of them—but it also prevents or discourages other
people from building on that content—hip-hop artists will be less able
to remix the songs, and fans will be less able to create tribute websites
containing the songs.
There also is a political dimension to private property. The ability
to own property and thereby to establish a means of independence
from others makes it possible for the property owner to assert political
independence. Sometimes it is said that property is a precondition of
democracy, because property enables a citizen to speak freely and participate in public affairs without concern that political participation
will undermine one’s economic well-being. For Thomas Jefferson, this
meant that everyone (or at least every adult white male) should have
the opportunity to own land and that land ownership should not be
concentrated in a few wealthy families. “Dependence begets subservience and venality,” he wrote, while independent ownership contributes
to democracy.
In the 1960s the political argument for property was applied to the
many people who in one way or another depend on the government for
their livelihood. In a much-celebrated law review article titled “The New
Property,” Yale law school professor Charles Reich argued that welfare
recipients, government employees, and the holders of public franchises
and licenses needed property rights in their benefits to establish themselves as politically independent of the state.
Lately we have come to recognize the limits of the political argument
for private property. As Jefferson noted, it is not just property but the
distribution of property that contributes to democracy. When property
is concentrated in large corporations and super-rich individuals, and
when wealthy institutions dominate the political process, the ability of
individuals to participate and influence affairs declines.
Finally, there is a strong personal dimension to property. Things can
be very important to people because they contribute to creating a sense
of self, a sense of place, a sense of being and belonging. It is not too far
a stretch to say that the importance of a favorite doll or a treasured
Law 101
220
blanket to little Suzie is analogous to her parents’ ownership of a house,
or other cherished items, from family heirlooms to an expensive car.
These elements of property define, in part, who Suzie and her parents
are, and without the ability to own them they would not be the same
persons. The point can be seen by looking at environments in which
people have little access to property. In prisons or psychiatric hospitals,
inmates collect a few belongings, hide them, or carry them around to
establish a personal space and a sense of self. And an important demonstration of selflessness in a religious order is abandoning property: not
just taking a vow of poverty but giving up the ability to own more than
a few necessities as personal property.
What Kinds of Property Are There?
Property covers a lot of ground. (Forgive the pun.) As we have seen,
Suzie’s doll, her parents’ house, and her father’s copyright are only some
of the subjects of property. The law treats different kinds of property
differently, so it is helpful to sort out the kinds of property that one
can own.
Perhaps the most basic distinction is between real property and personal property. Real property is land and things permanently attached to
the land. (Thus the origin of terms such as “real estate” and “Realtor.”)
Personal property is everything else. Furniture, jewelry, and cars are personal property but so are intangibles such as copyrights, patents, and
stocks and bonds. Some types of property present difficult definitional
issues—growing crops are sometimes real property, sometimes personal
property—but for the most part the distinction between real and personal property is easy to understand.
Why we have the distinction and what it means are more complicated, though. In medieval times, land was not only an object of wealth
but also the basis of a system of social organization. After the decline of
feudalism, land still merited special treatment because it was the most
widespread and important form of wealth and, as such, was subject to
special procedural forms. For example, when Thomas Jefferson argued
for the distribution of property as protection against tyranny, he meant
the distribution of land among small farmers, in opposition to large dynastic landholdings.
Today the historical distinction between real and personal property,
combined with the functional differences between property that doesn’t
go anywhere and property that does, is seen in the different treatment of
the different kinds of property. Separate bodies of law regulate each type
of property and many subcategories within each type. Selling a piece of
Property Law
221
land is governed by one body of law; selling a car is governed by another.
The ways in which a landowner can use a piece of land is governed by
several overlapping bodies of law, while the rights an owner has in a car
or a copyright are different still.
As should be evident, some property is tangible and some is intangible. Indeed, land once was the most prevalent form of property, but
now intangible property dwarfs real property in value and importance.
The average family may own a car and a house, but they also may own
mutual funds, bank accounts, and retirement accounts that exceed the
value of their tangible property.
A particular kind of intangible property is intellectual property, or
property created through intellectual work rather than physical work.
Patents and copyrights are intellectual property. A patent is the exclusive right to use, license, or sell an invention. When an inventor designs
a better mousetrap (or, more realistically these days, when the research
department of a large pharmaceutical company creates a new drug), the
inventor can apply to the government, proving the originality and usefulness of the invention, and be granted a patent that makes the invention the inventor’s property for a term of years. Patent law originally
protected mechanical innovations, like mousetraps, but it now extends
to other types of inventions; controversies have arisen over how far it
should go in covering business methods (such as Amazon.com’s one-click
ordering system), living organisms (such as microbes used for cleaning
up oil spills), and even scientific discoveries (such as the decoding of the
human genome).
Similarly, when a novelist writes a book, she acquires a property interest in the work known as a copyright. Copyright covers many kinds
of creative works, including works of fiction and nonfiction (such as this
book), photographs, songs, movies, and websites. Copyright protects
the expression of ideas rather than the ideas themselves; Disney cannot
prevent you from creating a cartoon with an amusing mouse as the
protagonist, but it can prevent you from depicting its particular mouse,
Mickey.
Trademarks are a kind of property related to intellectual property.
Patents and copyrights are protected because they are original creations;
trademarks are protected because they have commercial value. The
name “McDonald’s” and the golden arches symbol have value because
people associate them with McDonald’s fast food and all of the convenience, quality, and fun that the company tries to evoke with the images.
Accordingly, the McDonald’s Corporation has a property interest in the
name and the symbol, although the extent of the interest is different
from other forms of property.
Law 101
222
Intellectual property illustrates some very important points about
property in general. First, when we think of property, it is easy to think
that property is somehow naturally occurring and the only issue is to
how to allocate it. Land, trees, and even manufactured products have
an existence that predates their allocation as property. But the nature
of copyrights and patents should make clear that property is a product
of the law. Without law, there would still be inventions and novels, but
there would be no property rights in them. Because intellectual property
is created and regulated by law, it may be easier to see this than with
property that has been allocated by centuries of common law rulings.
Second, intellectual property makes clear that there is no single
conception of the ownership of property. Patents, copyrights, and
trademarks are all forms of intellectual property, but the law governing
them creates different interests with respect to each—a different bundle
of rights. The duration of the property interest, for example, is twenty
years for a patent, the life of the author plus seventy years for a copyright (or up to 120  years for copyrights held by companies), and as
long as it is commercially valuable for a trademark. Congress changes
these terms from time to time—in 1998, it extended copyright terms,
notably protecting Disney’s Mickey Mouse copyright, which was about
to expire. After those periods, the property goes into the public domain
and can be copied or used by anyone. In each case, the law constructs
what it means to own property, and the definition differs with respect to
different kinds of property.
Third, intellectual property, like all other property, is a product of
the law’s balancing of the interests of owners, nonowners, and society
at large. The Constitution empowers the federal government to grant
patents and copyrights “to promote the progress of science and useful
arts,” and intellectual property law both creates and restricts the owner’s
rights in order to achieve that objective. In return for the grant of exclusive patent rights by the government, the inventor has to disclose what
the invention is and how it works; other inventors can then build on
that knowledge in making discoveries of their own. Copyright includes
a concept of fair use, so that the copyright owner’s interest is not exclusive; a reviewer can quote part of a novel in a review, or a college professor can use a portion of it to illustrate a point in an English course
without infringing the copyright. Some of the most heated intellectual
property debates of recent years have involved this kind of balancing,
such as whether copyright terms should be extended for longer periods
and to what extent producers of online content can use songs and images
created by others.
Property Law
223
Who Owns the Internet?
The Internet is a particularly good illustration for thinking about property because the explosion of new technologies and new uses presents
many different puzzles for the law to solve. The beginning of this chapter
explained that property law does not follow the intuitive understanding
of the absolute ownership of things. The Internet is made up of many
kinds of things, information that is like things, and some things that are
hardly thing-like at all, and deciding who has what rights requires creative analysis and not just intuition.
The easiest part of the Internet to understand in property terms is its
physical infrastructure. The Internet is a network of computer networks.
You own your computer at the very end of the network. Your Internet
service provider owns the wires that go into your house and connect
to your computer. Starbucks owns the router that broadcasts a Wi-Fi
signal to its customers. Innumerable other routers, access points, satellites, computers, and miles of cable are owned by somebody.
When we talk about the Internet, however, most of the time we are
talking about the information that flows through the physical infrastructure: emails, YouTube videos, blogs, Wikipedia, movies, celebrity gossip
websites, and more. The law, including contract and tort law as well as
property law, has had some difficulty adapting to the production and
distribution of this wealth of information.
A basic principle is that everything on the Internet is owned by
someone. The Fox television network holds the copyright in episodes
of The Simpsons posted on its website. Google owns the trademark in
the multicolored “Google” that resides on its search home page. A news
organization that puts an article on its websites, a college student who
uploads a wacky video on YouTube, and a blogger who posts musings
about her dog each has property rights in the content they have created.
Because everything online is owned by someone, the owner can assert
the ordinary rights of a property owner. The content is intellectual property, so the owner possesses a copyright that others cannot infringe.
A music company that copyrights a song has the same rights to distribution of the song on the Internet as it does in distribution on a CD.
Therefore, when Joel Tenenbaum, a Providence, Rhode Island, graduate
student, used file-sharing sites like Napster to post and download thirty
songs by Nirvana and other groups, a jury ordered him to pay $675,000
to the groups’ recording companies for copyright infringement. Similarly,
if you post an entire Simpsons episode on your website, prepare to hear
from Fox’s lawyers.
Law 101
224
But copyright, like all property, does not give the owner absolute rights
to control its use. Other people can make “fair use” of the owner’s work,
including use that is “transformative”—not just copying, but adding
something new that presents a different expression or meaning than the
original work. If transformative uses of other people’s copyrights were
not permitted, the Internet would hardly work at all. Google constantly
crawls the web, collecting information on text, images, and video on
millions of websites. When you Google “Kardashian” and click “Images”
on the search results page, you will see countless thumbnail images of
members of the celebrity family. Each of those images is the property
of a copyright holder—People magazine, a photographer, the E! television network, or the celebrities themselves. Does Google infringe on
copyrights when it shows you the thumbnails? No, because Google’s use
of the photos is transformative; showing a photograph is one thing, but
showing many thumbnail photographs as a search result is something
else entirely, and something that has enormous public benefit in giving
everyone access to the vast resources of the Internet in a way that otherwise would be unavailable. The purpose of the copyright law is to promote creativity; search engines serve that purpose by making it easier to
find information online.
Protection of trademarks on the Internet similarly is available but
limited. Congress enacted the Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection
Act to enable trademark owners to protect their marks. John Zuccarini
registered the domain names electronicboutique.com, ebwold.com, and
ebworl.com to take advantage of misspelling by web users trying to go
to electronicsboutique.com and ebworld.com, the sites of video game
retailer Electronics Boutique. Electronics Boutique sued and the court,
applying the statute, ordered Zuccarini to turn over the domain names
and to pay damages (Electronics Boutique Holdings Corp. v. Zuccarini,
2000). But when Andrew Faber created a website called Bally Sucks to
post complaints about Bally Total Fitness health clubs, the site did not
infringe or dilute Bally’s trademarked logos and names because no one
could confuse the complaint site with the real Bally’s (Bally Total Fitness
Holding Corp v. Faber, 1998).
Internet intermediaries such as YouTube or Comcast are stuck in
the middle of disputes like these, because they are potentially liable for
secondarily infringing the rights of a copyright owner by hosting the
offending website. The Digital Millennium Copyright Act immunizes
them from liability if they comply with the act’s requirements and
attempts to balance the interests of owners of intellectual property and
others who use it in new and creative ways. If the owner of a song
discovers that a video containing it is posted on YouTube without her
Property Law
225
permission, the owner sends a takedown notice informing YouTube
of the potential infringement, and YouTube responds by removing the
offending material. But the original poster then can request that YouTube
put the material back up, which shifts the burden back to the copyright
owner. When Stephanie Lenz uploaded a YouTube video of her thirteenmonth-old son bouncing along to “Let’s Go Crazy” by Prince, Universal
Music sent a takedown notice to YouTube demanding that the video be
taken down because it infringed their copyright in the song. YouTube
notified Lenz that it was removing the video. Exercising her rights under
the statute, Lenz filed a protest claiming that her use of the song was fair
use permitted under the copyright law, so YouTube reposted the song
and Lenz went one step further, suing Universal for misusing the statute.
The court, recognizing the conflicting interest at stake in property law,
concluded that Universal had to consider whether Lenz’s inclusion of
their song in her video constituted fair use (Lenz v.  Universal Music
Corp., 2015).
One instinct about information on the Internet is to analogize it to
traditional forms of property, but sometimes the analogy is hard to draw.
In the physical world the tort of trespass to chattels provides a remedy
for interfering with the interest of an owner of personal property (a
chattel), as where a teenager takes a neighbor’s car for a joyride. Can
someone trespass on a computer system? When Bidder’s Edge’s software
robot accessed eBay’s auction website 100,000 times a day to collect
information to aggregate on Bidder’s Edge’s own site, thereby raising
the possibility that other auction aggregators would do the same thing
and overwhelm eBay’s servers, the court ordered Bidder’s Edge to stop
(eBay, Inc. v. Bidder’s Edge, Inc., 2000). But when Kourosh Hamidi, a
disgruntled former employee of Intel Corporation, sent six emails over
two years to some 35,000 Intel employees, the court found there was
no trespass because the impact of Hamidi’s emails on Intel’s system was
trivial (Intel Corp. v. Hamidi, 2003). To deal with the broader problem
of invasion of everyone’s email accounts by spam, Congress enacted the
cleverly named Controlling the Assault of Non-solicited Pornography
and Marketing Act of 2003—the CAN-SPAM Act. The act prohibits the
sending of fraudulent email and requires unsubscribe procedures, but as
your daily email demonstrates, enforcement has been limited.
The Internet is governed by contract law as well as property. Websites
restrict how people can use the information they contain through
terms of service, whether agreed to through an “I accept” box or not;
Chapter 6 discusses the enforceability of these terms. But some owners
of intellectual property on the web have taken a different approach and
expanded rather than restricted the rights of other people to use their
Law 101
226
property. Blizzard Entertainment gives users of its hugely popular World
of Warcraft role-playing game a blanket license to use screen-shots from
the game on their personal websites. Creative Commons is a nonprofit
group that offers standard forms for licensing intellectual property that
make it easy for web users to allow others to use their works. Creative
Commons licenses include forms that, for example, allow others to
use their work in any way as long as they credit the original owner, to
“share alike” by using property as long as they then allow others to use
their own works, and to use it in any way but only for noncommercial
purposes.
The most provocative challenge the Internet presents to law arises in
virtual worlds, including the Necromancers, Paladins, Shadowknights,
and other avatars who stalk EverQuest, and Second Life with its millions
of inhabitants and its own economy. Assets in virtual worlds have realworld value; Linden dollars, the currency of Second Life, are bought and
sold for real U.S. dollars. Avatars in virtual worlds acquire property the
same way as their real-life counterparts, through work, trade, and ingenuity, and the property is as important to the virtual persona as traditional property is to physical people. Should the law therefore recognize
virtual property rights? Or can the company that produces and hosts a
virtual world use the terms of service to exercise control over everything
that happens there? Marc Bragg sued Linden Research, the producer
of Second Life, after Linden froze his account, depriving him of virtual
property worth $4,000 to $6,000 in the real world; Bragg and Linden
eventually settled the case. And what law should be used to resolve the
disputes that arise? If a virtual world is a community with its own norms
and rules, should it have its own legal system as well, or should the existing legal system at least recognize the norms and rules as binding in
real-world courts? As these environments have evolved from games to
worlds, they challenge our notions of property and law.
How Can Someone Acquire Property?
A crucial issue for the law of property is under what circumstances the
law will recognize that someone has come to own an item of property. In
making that determination, the law has to grapple with the potentially
inconsistent policies that underlie property law. We want to encourage
people to engage in productive activity. We want to recognize the personal value property holds for people. We want a system that will provide clear indications of who owns what. And so on.
A person can come to own a piece of property in a number of ways.
The most common way to acquire property, of course, is to buy it. Two
Property Law
227
ways that were of historical importance but don’t happen much anymore are discovery and conquest. Discovery means finding previously
unknown territory and doing something to take possession of it, such
as planting a flag and establishing a settlement. Today the whole world
has been charted, so discovery is irrelevant. The only remaining unoccupied land is in outer space, but, by virtue of an international treaty, the
United States doesn’t own the moon, even though it was the first nation
to land there. Historically, conquest has been closely related to discovery.
European powers such as Holland, England, France, and Spain acquired
ownership of America by establishing the first non-native settlements,
conquering the indigenous peoples who lived here, and mapping the new
territories.
A means of acquiring property related to discovery and conquest is
by being the first person to possess or use it, giving rise to the saying
“first in time, first in right.” The principle is illustrated by the struggle,
physical and legal, for the baseball that Barry Bonds hit for his recordsetting seventy-third home run. The San Francisco Giants slugger
crushed a homer into the right-field stands of Pac Bell Park on the last
day of the 2001 season. Fan Alex Popov caught the ball in his glove,
but a melee ensued, and another fan, Patrick Hayashi, came up with
the ball. Popov sued Hayashi, claiming the ball was rightfully his because he was the first to possess it. By convention, the Giants, the original owner of the ball, yielded ownership to whichever fan came up
with it. After a three-week court battle that involved viewing videotape of the event, hearing more than a dozen witnesses, and soliciting
the opinions of legal experts, Superior Court Judge Kevin McCarthy
found that Popov had momentarily caught the ball but had not held
it long enough to establish control. Hayashi also was involuntarily
knocked to the ground, where he picked up the loose ball. Each had
a type of possession, neither was a wrongdoer, so each had rights
in the ball which, according to Judge McCarthy’s Solomonic ruling,
would be realized if the ball was sold, with each of them getting half
of the proceeds. (When the ball was sold at auction, it fetched a price
of $450,000, disappointing Popov and Hayashi because of earlier
estimates up to $1.5 million.)
What about property that is discovered after someone else already
has established ownership of it? Suppose you find a ring on the sidewalk and take it to a jeweler to determine its value. The jeweler tells you
that the ring contains valuable diamonds but refuses to return it to you,
arguing that you are not the true owner. Who is entitled to the ring?
Recall that property is not a relationship between people and things but
among people. It is true that you are not the owner of the ring, but you do
Law 101
228
have a superior right of ownership to the jeweler because you found
and possessed the ring, so you are entitled to have it returned to you.
But now suppose that the jeweler recognizes the ring as belonging to
one of his customers and calls the customer who comes to the store to reclaim the ring. Who gets the ring, you or the customer? The customer—
the original owner—does. You, the finder, have a right of ownership
that is superior to the jeweler and everyone else, except the true owner.
Thus the maxim “finders keepers, losers weepers” is not good law. This
explains the general rule about lost items: Turn them in to the police,
and if the original owner does not claim them within a specified time period, the items belong to you, because your claim is superior to everyone
except the owner.
Another way to acquire ownership to property is by adverse possession.
Adverse possession is an odd concept because it allows someone to acquire ownership by taking it away from the rightful owner.
Suppose you own a cabin in the backwoods, but, intent on seeking
your fortune, you move away from it to live in an apartment in the big
city. The move is successful and you enjoy urban life. Meanwhile and unknown to you Zeke, who likes to live off the grid, moves into the cabin
and for all practical purposes treats the cabin as if he actually owned it.
If you return to the cabin in a couple of years and discover that Zeke has
been squatting there, you can order him out and, if he refuses to leave,
bring a legal action to have him ejected. But if you wait too long, your
legal claim to the property will be lost and Zeke can become the legal
owner through the doctrine of adverse possession.
Adverse possession is, as property scholar Joseph Singer notes, a
“magical rule [that] mutates a wrong into a right.” Why should the law
favor Zeke, a trespasser and wrongdoer, over you, the true legal owner
of the cabin? In part the doctrine is an application of the principle of a
statute of limitations, which requires that a claim be brought within a
certain period of time after a harm occurs, or else the claim is lost forever. Moreover, although ordinarily the law does not reward someone
for doing a wrongful act, such as occupying someone else’s land, here
the law rewards Zeke for his industriousness and penalizes you for your
lack of diligence in failing to attend to your property and to assert your
rights for so long. Although possession isn’t always nine-tenths of the
law, as the maxim says, here possession is rewarded and used as the basis
for clarifying ownership.
The jurisdictions vary in the precise requirements for adverse
possession, but generally an adverse possessor can claim ownership if
for the statutory period (from ten to twenty-one years, depending on
the state) it has made open and continuous use of the land without the
Property Law
229
owner’s permission. In essence, the adverse possessor has to have acted
like the owner, making use of the land as an owner would, in such a way
as to put the real owner on notice that someone has effectively taken the
land for its own. This is just what Zeke did, and the doctrine of adverse
possession means that if you snooze, you lose.
Someone also can acquire property by gift. A gift is a present transfer
of a property interest. For a gift to be legally effective, the donor must
intend to make a gift, the property or evidence of it must be delivered
to the recipient, and the recipient must accept it. The law is wary of
purported gifts, presuming perhaps that people are more self-interested
than altruistic, so it requires clear evidence of the intention and delivery.
(Acceptance is presumed where the gift is beneficial to the recipient.)
Requiring delivery is particularly important because it brings home to the
donor the fact that he or she is relinquishing the property and provides
evidence of the gift, in case there is a subsequent dispute. Therefore, if
I hand you a ring, saying, “I want you to have this,” the gift is effective.
If I say, “I want you to have this ring, and I will give it to you after I wear
it to dinner,” the gift is not effective. There is no present delivery, and a
promise to make a gift is usually unenforceable. (See Chapter 6.)
What about an engagement ring? When a man gives an engagement
ring to his fiancée, there is intention to make a gift, delivery, and acceptance. If the engagement is broken off, is he entitled to get the ring back?
This is a unique situation that most courts characterize as a conditional
gift. The ring is given in contemplation of marriage, so it is unlike a
sweater, a book, or even another piece of jewelry that he gives her during
the courtship. If the marriage is off, he has a right to ask for the ring to
be returned.
How Is Property Purchased and Sold?
The most common method of acquiring property is by purchase. People
buy and sell property every day, of course, from a morning cup of
coffee to the family car. Most of the legal issues that arise from these
transactions are governed by contract law, not property law. Here we
discuss what is for many people the most economically significant purchase they will ever make, the purchase of a home. The purpose is not to
provide a legal checklist for the home buyer but to illustrate some of the
important issues in property law as they arise in real estate transactions.
First consider why home purchases are worth examining separately
at all. One reason obviously is the amount of money at stake. A family’s
home is likely to be one of their largest assets, perhaps along with a retirement fund and other investments. Where more money is at stake,
Law 101
230
the law tends to be more complicated. But the sale of real estate is also
more complicated because of the bundle of rights concept of property.
With most forms of personal property, only one person has an interest in
the property at a time, and that person usually is the one who possesses
the property. Real property is different. Several different persons are
likely to have an interest in the property, and possession is not as good
an indicator of ownership. The same piece of property will have been
transferred many times over the years, with careless indications of ownership, the property boundary between two neighbors’ yards may not be
well established, and a bank, a home equity lender, and the grandparents
who helped with the down payment all may have an interest in a piece
of property. Therefore, some special principles of law have grown up
around real estate transactions.
Let’s describe the elements of a typical home sale and then focus
on two of the elements as particularly pertinent to our examination
of property law. The transaction involves both property and contract
concepts. The contract issues arise sufficiently frequently that they tend
to be treated a little differently from contract law issues arising in other
contexts. And custom, local practices, good faith, and cooperation, more
than law, are what carry many of these transactions through to completion; only where problems come up that cannot be resolved by other
means do the parties resort to the legal system.
A homeowner and a purchaser can arrange the sale themselves, but
very often a real estate broker is the intermediary in the transaction.
Although the broker often works with both seller and buyer, helping
the seller get the house ready for sale, setting the price, advertising,
and helping the buyer find the perfect house, by contract the broker
often is the agent of the seller, not the buyer. (Sometimes there is a separate buyer’s agent, or the agent acts as a dual agent, representing both
parties.) Under the brokerage contract, the seller’s broker has the obligation to help the seller get the highest price possible and to otherwise
serve the seller’s interests. The law also defines certain obligations that
the broker owes to the buyer, however, such as a duty to fairly represent
the condition of the house.
Once the buyer has focused on a house, she makes an offer to buy.
Local practice dictates whether the offer is oral or in writing, whether it
must be accompanied by an earnest money deposit, and how the subsequent negotiations will be carried out. When the buyer and seller have
agreed on a price, they proceed to enter into a written purchase and sale
agreement. The agreement includes all of the terms of the transaction,
Property Law
231
including the price, closing date, and conditions to the closing; the buyer’s
right to inspect the property; and the seller’s duty to deliver good title to
the property. The closing date is set several weeks or even months away,
enabling the buyer to do what she needs to do to get ready to close, especially obtaining a mortgage. Once this interim period is concluded, the
parties close the transaction by exchanging numerous pieces of paper,
including the money from the buyer to the seller and the deed in the
other direction.
Consider two elements of this transaction. First, the essence of the
transaction is the seller conveying to the buyer its interest in the land.
What exactly is the seller transferring, and what happens if questions
arise concerning who owns what? Second, in most cases the buyer has to
borrow money to meet the seller’s price, typically from a bank or mortgage company. What kind of property interest is a mortgage, and what
does it mean to the buyer and the bank?
When land is sold, the seller delivers to the buyer a deed, a formal written
document embodying the conveyance of the property. (Deeds are used in
all transfers of land, even if the property is given away rather than sold.)
In medieval times the means of transfer was not by document but by livery
of seisin. The buyer and seller would meet on the property, in the presence
of witnesses, and the seller would state that he was transferring ownership and would hand the buyer a twig or a clod of dirt to symbolize the
transfer. Today a deed serves the same formal purposes; it makes clear to
all that a transfer has taken place and, through the document rather than
the witnesses, establishes a record of the transfer. The deed identifies the
parties and the land and expresses the seller’s intent to convey the property. The deed must be signed by the seller and delivered to the buyer (or
to the buyer’s agent); this is the origin of the phrase “signed, sealed, and
delivered,” though most jurisdictions have abolished the need for a seal.
The homeowner who receives the deed acquires title to the house.
Title is the formal concept of ownership in real property law. Typically,
a seller is required to deliver marketable title to a buyer. The full legal
meaning of this definition is complex, but think about what the buyer
expects to be getting: full ownership of the property, without any conflicting interests such as other claims of ownership, leases, or mortgages
(called encumbrances) and without any problems in the record that
substantiates the title (called chain of title defects). One of the reasons
that the sale of real property generates such a complicated body of law is
that it is not easy to guarantee that there are no encumbrances or chain
of title defects on a piece of property. After all, the land has been there
Law 101
232
for hundreds of years, during which time many people have owned it,
used it, borrowed money against it, conveyed it, let their neighbors use
it, and so on. Any of these acts could affect the current state of the title.
How do a seller and buyer make sure that the seller is giving the buyer
the kind of title the buyer is paying for?
Every state has addressed this problem by enacting a recording act,
which establishes a governmental repository of land records. Often the
acts establish the Recorder of Deeds or Clerk of the Court in a county as
the place where deeds, long-term leases, mortgages, and other documents
pertaining to land transfers are maintained. Since in many states the recording acts have been in existence for centuries, the land records provide a comprehensive history of the recorded interests in the land. There
is a record of the deed the seller received when he bought the land, and
a record of the deed the person who sold to the seller received when she
bought the land, and so on back into history.
The recording acts also establish priority among successive purchasers
of a piece of land. Suppose an unscrupulous seller sells a piece of land to
two different people. Who actually owns the land? In a few states, the
first person who records a deed wins, even if that person knows that the
property was sold to someone else previously. This system encourages a
race to the courthouse, so it is not much used. More common are statutes that specify that the second purchaser has superior title only if she
purchases the property without notice of the prior conveyance, or that
the second purchaser has priority if she has no notice and records before
the prior purchaser.
The recording system can’t prevent all title problems. First, there
are records besides those in the recorder of deeds’ office that must be
searched to establish all of the interests in the property. If real estate
taxes have not been paid, for example, the government may have a tax
lien on the property, and the lien will appear only in the tax records. (A
lien is a claim against the property that has effect only when the property is sold; at the time of sale, the lien holder can get its money out of
the proceeds of sale.) Other problems don’t appear in any record at all;
a neighbor may have acquired an easement to use part of the property,
but that right will be apparent only (if at all) from an inspection of the
property itself.
Different practices have grown up to deal with problems of title. The
two main kinds are title abstracts and title insurance. Both begin with a
search of the records. Lawyers or professional title abstracters examine
the available public records to trace back the chain of title. They also
look for tax liens and other potential problems, and they check to see if,
for example, some prior owner conveyed the property twice or failed to
Property Law
233
pay a mortgage. When the title abstract is complete, the buyer’s attorney
can determine if the title is marketable or, if it is not, what it would
take to clear up the problems (for example, paying off a lien). When
title insurance is provided, the title insurer provides a guarantee against
defects that eventually may cloud the buyer’s title or even cause it to lose
the land.
Few home buyers can afford to pay cash for such an expensive purchase, so many buyers borrow a large portion of the purchase price.
Most often they borrow from a lending institution, such as a bank or
mortgage company, but they may also borrow from a relative or from
the seller. The transaction has two elements, one contractual and one
property based. Since the money to buy the house is not a gift, the lender
expects to be repaid. To enforce that expectation, the lender makes the
borrower promise to repay the money. Usually the borrower signs a
note, a document that states the terms of the loan and the obligation to
repay. If the borrower doesn’t repay the money according to the terms
of the loan (such as by making monthly payments of specified amounts),
the lender can sue for breach of the promise to pay.
The lender’s breach of contract action for the borrower’s failure to
repay the loan does not provide much security for the lender though.
The borrower could sell the house and squander the proceeds of the sale,
and the lender would have nothing but a worthless lawsuit to recover
its money. So lenders typically back up their contract interest with a
property interest as well. The property interest is the mortgage (in some
states called a deed of trust). The mortgage document contains many
of the same terms as the note, such as the promise to repay, but its key
is the pledge of the house as collateral to secure the repayment of the
loan. If the borrower doesn’t repay the loan, the lender can pursue its
property interest by selling the house and taking what it is owed out of
the proceeds. (Security interests in property also are used in many other
contexts, including personal property. When a bank extends credit to a
business, for example, the bank may take a security interest equivalent
to a mortgage in the inventory of the business.)
The mortgage is an example of concurrent interests in property. As
long as the homeowner (called the mortgagor) keeps up payments on the
loan, the lender (the mortgagee) can’t do anything to assert its interest
in the property. But when the borrower defaults, the lender’s property
interest moves to the fore, and it can claim its share of the property.
As with other concurrent interests in property, the mortgage
presents conflicts between the interests of the borrower and lender.
Suppose the borrower has paid off half of her debt and then fails to
make some payments. Can the lender take the property because of
Law 101
234
the default? If so, the lender gets a windfall, since it has the property
and partial repayment. In most states, if the lender wants to pursue its
interest in the property after a default it has to bring a court action.
The borrower can still keep the property by satisfying the debt. If she
does not, the court will order the property sold under supervision of a
court official. If the proceeds of the sale are less than the amount the
borrower owes, the lender gets a deficiency judgment for the balance.
If the proceeds are greater than the outstanding debt, the borrower
gets the difference.
What about the reverse situation? Suppose the borrower wants to
stop making payments and let the lender just take the house; can she do
that, or does she still owe the balance of the loan? This became a widespread issue in the housing crisis that began in 2008. Many homeowners
were “under water” on their mortgages—because of the collapsing real
estate market, many homeowners owed more on their mortgage loans
than their houses were worth. Under the traditional rules, in some states
homeowners could default on their mortgages, walk away from the
house, and owe nothing more; in other states, they still owed the balance
of the loan. As often happens in times of crisis, the law accommodated
economic reality, and the federal government developed plans that
allowed at least some homeowners to refinance their loans with lower
payments or to walk away altogether.
How Is Property Transferred on Death?
A separate body of property law deals with the disposition of property
on death. This is the law of wills, intestate succession, and trusts. Much
property is transferred between spouses or between generations on the
death of the owner, or through planning mechanisms that anticipate
the owner’s death, or is dedicated to charitable purposes on death or
through trusts.
First a note about procedure: Every state has a separate division of
its court system to deal with wills and trusts, called generically probate
courts. When someone dies, his or her will is presented to the probate
court and an executor is appointed to administer the person’s property,
collecting amounts owed, paying debts, and disposing of the property as
directed in the will. If the person has no will, the probate court appoints
an administrator to dispose of the person’s property. Probate can be a
cumbersome process and, because it is administered by a court, it is
public, so there has been something of a movement to avoid the process.
Some people establish living trusts for this purpose (which have their
own problems), others use nonprobate devices such as life insurance,
Property Law
235
and most states permit small estates to be administered through a less
time-consuming, less expensive, summary procedure.
A person who dies without leaving a will is said by the law to have
died intestate, and the law specifies how that person’s property will be
distributed. Intestate succession is governed by statute in every jurisdiction. The predominant purpose of these statutes is to dispose of the
property as most people would want. In constructing that assumption,
the law also takes account of views about how people should want their
property distributed, as well as how they generally do want it distributed. Therefore, the law assumes that most people would want their
property to be distributed to those family members who most rely on
them for economic support. If the decedent (the deceased person) is
survived by a spouse and no descendants (children or grandchildren),
the spouse receives the entire estate. If the decedent leaves descendants
but no spouse, then the descendants get the estate. If both a spouse and
one or more descendants survive, the property is divided among them,
typically with the spouse receiving a third to a half of the estate (perhaps
more if it is a small estate) and the descendants receiving the rest.
The rules of intestate succession are one-size-fits-all. A surviving spouse
who was married to the decedent for fifty years and has no independent
means of support is treated the same as a spouse who was married only
for a day and has her or his own profession. Adult children, minor children, loving children, and estranged children all are treated the same. To
avoid the intestacy laws and dispose of property in a different way, many
people make wills.
There also are at least two other reasons to make a will. First, if parents
die with minor children, the children and their property have to be cared
for. If both parents die, the court will appoint a guardian for the children, who may or may not be the person the parents would have chosen.
In a will, a parent can appoint someone to be the guardian of minor
children, and the court usually will confirm the choice. Even if only one
parent dies, if the children inherit property by intestate succession then a
guardian of the property must be appointed, which requires a degree of
court intervention and again may not accord with the parents’ wishes.
Second, the federal estate tax laws and inheritance and estate tax laws in
some states can take a bite out of the estate. Various devices can be used
in a will to reduce or minimize the tax burden on the estate.
Therefore, many people make wills to dispose of their property. The
power to dispose of one’s property by will is one of the basic bundle of
rights that accompanies the ownership of property. Just as a person can
sell, give away, destroy, or otherwise dispose of his property while he is
alive, so, too, he can direct who is to receive it after his death.
Law 101
236
There is an important exception to the principle of freedom to dispose of property by will. In general, a married person cannot give
away all of his or her property by will, leaving nothing for a spouse.
Marriage is seen as an economic partnership. While spouses are alive,
they have a duty to support each other, a right to share property and
income on divorce, and, in some cases, the right to share property
owned by the other. The obligations of the economic partnership are
not extinguished upon the death of a spouse. The law has the concept
of an elective share in the property of a deceased spouse. If, for example, a wife’s will leaves all of her property to her children by a prior
marriage and to the SPCA, her surviving spouse has a statutory right to
claim a portion of the estate despite the will. Although the jurisdictions
vary somewhat, some typical statutes entitle the spouse to take onethird of the estate despite a contrary disposition in the will, and others
graduate the surviving spouse’s share according to how long they have
been married and take the survivor’s assets into account in determining
the elective share.
Note two things about the elective share statutes. First, the share is optional; the surviving spouse can claim or decline the share. If the survivor
has enough money set aside so that he is happy to see the wife’s money
go to the SPCA, or if the will sets up elaborate trusts for estate planning
purposes that he does not want to upset, he can refuse to claim his share
and let the will operate. Second, it may seem odd that elective share
statutes guarantee a portion of the estate to a surviving spouse but not
to the decedent’s children, who are even more likely to be economically
dependent. The assumption of the statute, however, is that the surviving
spouse will support the couple’s children, and passing the money to the
spouse avoids the need to have a guardian appointed to manage the
children’s property.
Most Americans who are middle-aged and older and most people
with a substantial amount of property have a will, so devise of property
according to the terms of a will is the most common means of transmission of property at death. The basic form of will must express the intent
to dispose of property in writing, signed by the testator, and attested to
by witnesses.
The purposes served by the required formalities can be seen by
contrasting the formal will with a possible substitute. Suppose after Jane
Doe dies her nephew comes into court and says that his beloved aunt
told him that he could have $100,000 of her money after she died. How
can we be sure that Doe actually said that? Now that she is no longer
around, the nephew is the only witness, and, given the temptation to be
overly optimistic or unscrupulous, his testimony is suspect. Second, how
Property Law
237
can we be sure that she meant it? Did she really understand that she
was giving away a portion of her property, or was she just making conversation? Third, how can we be sure what she meant? Were there any
conditions attached to the gift? Fourth, how can we be sure she didn’t
change her mind, with or without telling the nephew of the change?
Formal wills provide evidence of the intent to make a gift and make clear
to the testator and the court that a gift was seriously considered.
The question is how formal is formal enough. Over time the essential
requirements of writing, signature, and witnesses have remained relatively constant.
The requirement of a written will establishes a permanent record for
the court to consider and brings home the seriousness of the endeavor.
The signature requirement demonstrates seriousness, and it also shows
finality. (Another function—providing evidence that it actually was the
testator who made the will—is probably less important than it used to
be.) The law assumes that if someone is merely making notes about the
disposition of property, or doing a draft of a will, the document will
not be signed; only a final, complete version of a document is usually
signed, so the signature shows that the testator has fully and finally
expressed his or her wishes. The requirement of witnesses serves similar
functions.
Whenever the law requires certain formalities, the question arises as
to what happens in a case in which the formalities are not complied
with but the purposes behind the formalities are served. Suppose, for
example, during the execution ceremony of her will, the testator goes
to the bathroom while one of the witnesses is signing. The will does not
comply with the statutory requirement that the witnesses sign in the
presence of the testator; should the probate court refuse to enforce it
for that reason? If it doesn’t enforce the will, it will be denying effect to
the wishes of the testator over a technicality. If the court does enforce
the will, it begins the process of chipping away at the formalities, little
by little, raising the possibility that eventually they will be cut away altogether. Some states are stricter than others, but there has been a tendency in recent years to relax the requirements for insignificant errors
such as this.
Now take a more extreme case. An accident pinned Cecil George
Harris underneath his tractor. With his leg trapped but his hands free,
Harris scratched a message into the tractor’s fender: “In case I die in this
mess, I leave all to the wife. Cecil Geo Harris.”
Here we have a document that expresses a testamentary intent but
is not witnessed. Should it be accepted as a will despite the lack of
formality? Once again, the law faces a tough choice. Recognizing the
Law 101
238
validity of a holographic will (from holograph, meaning a handwriting)
undermines the required statutory formalities for a will and the purposes
those formalities serve. But failing to recognize its validity would undermine what in this case is the obvious intention of Harris, that his
wife be the beneficiary of his estate. It also would introduce a bias in
the law against people who can’t afford to hire a lawyer to draft a will.
About half the states recognize holographic wills, with some of them
recognizing such wills only if they are made by members of the Armed
Forces serving overseas, under the assumption that service members in
combat are less likely to have access to lawyers, or if they would be valid
in the state in which they were written.
In probate court procedure, someone in possession of a will submits it
for probate, to be accepted as the effective will. Someone else who believes
that the will that is proffered should not be effective can challenge the
will; the challenger will do this because he or she stands to take part of
the estate, either by intestate succession or under another will, if the will
does not go into effect. Aside from a defect in form, the most common
bases for challenging a will (which are still not very common) are because the testator lacked sufficient mental capacity to make a will or was
subject to undue influence.
The law uses different definitions of mental capacity for different
purposes. Here the question is:  Did the testator understand what he
or she was doing with respect to the will? This involves understanding
the nature of the property owned, the people who are to receive it or
are being excluded from it, and the relationship among the people and
the property being given away. Thus even if the testator is unable to
carry out normal business affairs or suffers from the delusion that he
is haunted by evil spirits, he still may have testamentary capacity if the
deficiencies or delusions do not interfere with the understanding necessary to dispose of one’s property reasonably. Difficult cases concern
testators who feel resentment because their children or grandchildren
have placed them in hospitals, nursing homes, or psychiatric institutions;
does this resentment have a reasonable basis, even though the testator
needs the care, or is it delusional?
Undue influence is sometimes alleged, either as to the entire will or
as to a particular bequest. Undue influence is particularly likely to be
presumed where the person who benefits from the will is in a position of
superiority over the testator, such as an attorney and her client, a doctor
and her patient, or someone who manages the affairs of an aged relative. The question, which depends heavily on the facts, is whether the
will is actually the product of the testator’s volition or that of the person
exerting the influence.
Property Law
239
What Is a Trust?
A trust is a division of the bundle of rights in property in an unusual
way. First, the management of the property is separated from the benefit of the property. The property is managed by a trustee, who usually
has the authority to invest the property, collect income, rent, or sell, but
who is paid a fee for its services, rather than receiving any income from
the property itself. The beneficiary of the trust owns the right to receive
the benefit from the property, such as the income it produces. Second,
the beneficiary’s rights are defined when the trust is established by the
grantor, the person who gives the property that becomes the principal
(or corpus, meaning body) of the trust. The grantor can, for example,
specify that the beneficiary can receive the income from the trust but no
payments from principal, that one beneficiary receives the income for life
and then the principal goes to someone else, or, in the case of charitable
trusts, that the income should be devoted to seeking a cure for cancer or
the care and feeding of stray cats.
As the last examples suggest, some trusts are devoted to charitable
purposes, but in the context of wills and family property, private trusts
are more important. Trusts are used for many purposes. Living trusts
can be used to keep property out of probate, which minimizes publicity
and may save fees, although the advantages of a living trust have been
lessened by recent reforms in probate laws. Trusts created either during
the grantor’s lifetime (inter vivos trusts) or in a will (testamentary trusts)
can protect the property of a person who is unable to manage the property, either because of a legal disability (a minor child, for example) or
because of practical inability to do so (someone who is unsophisticated
in financial matters). Probably the most prevalent use of trusts is for tax
purposes, particularly in estate planning. Currently the federal estate tax
law imposes a tax on the amount of an estate above a certain minimum
amount. When the husband dies, for example, his property can pass to a
trust, rather than to the surviving wife, to avoid having her estate exceed
the minimum amount when she dies later.
How Do People Own Property Collectively?
So far we have been thinking of property that one person or company
owns. In many cases, though, property interests—different elements of
the bundle of rights—are held by more than one person. For example,
property rights can be shared by several people or divided over time.
In property law, there are three kinds of concurrent estates, or forms
of co-ownership at the same time: joint tenancy, tenancy in common,
Law 101
240
and tenancy by the entirety. In all three forms of co-ownership (or
cotenancy), each tenant has the right to possess and use the entire
piece of property. Tenancy by the entirety is unique in that it is available only to married couples, so there can only be two co-owners
of a piece of tenancy by the entirety; a joint tenancy or tenancy in
common can have an unlimited number of co-owners. Joint tenancy
and tenancy by the entirety are like each other and unlike a tenancy
in common because the cotenants have a right of survivorship. When
one owner dies, the property automatically passes to the surviving
tenant. When a tenant in common dies, by contrast, his or her interest
in the property goes to his or her heirs, not to the surviving cotenant.
Finally, joint tenants and tenants by the entirety always have equal
shares in the property; the interests of tenants in common can be split
up in different ways (with one owning one-third and the other owning
two-thirds, for example).
Today concurrent ownership is used in many situations. Spouses may
have a joint checking account and a mutual fund account and may own
their house jointly. (In jurisdictions that allow tenancies by the entirety—
about half the states—that would be the form of ownership; otherwise,
these would be joint tenancies.) Two siblings may own the family farm
together. The copyright in a song may be held by the person who wrote
the lyrics and the one who wrote the music.
Let’s take one example to see how the different forms of co-ownership
work. This example focuses on joint tenancies and tenancies in common;
for most purposes, a tenancy by the entireties is treated the same as a
joint tenancy. Assume that two siblings inherited the house their parents
had lived in. The first question in dealing with these instances of coownership is: What kind of co-ownership is it? The mother was the later
of the two parents to die, and her will said, “I leave my house to Juan
and Maria, my children.” Are Juan and Maria joint tenants or tenants
in common? Put more generally, in the absence of a designation by the
original property owner, which form of co-ownership should the law
prefer? The answer depends on the structure of property law and the
underlying social conditions.
From the Middle Ages to modern times the law shifted its preference
for concurrent estates from joint tenancies to tenancies in common. The
traditional preference for a joint tenancy arose partly from the logic
of the property system and partly from practical concerns. Under the
estates system, joint tenants were seen as owning a single estate; when
one of them died, the estate remained unchanged, and it was simply held
by one fewer owner. Probably more important, the traditional property
system favored concentrating ownership in a smaller number of large
Property Law
241
landowners, a purpose that joint tenancy served well. Joint tenancies
also became effective estate planning devices, avoiding some of the
feudal taxes that otherwise would be due on the transfer of property at
death. By the eighteenth century, though, the presumption was otherwise. With the rise of a market economy and land viewed increasingly
as a commodity and an object of wealth like any other, it made more
sense to the legislatures and courts to prefer tenancies in common, which
made property more freely transferable; a co-owner could transfer his
share in property at death, and he could use it as collateral for debts,
with creditors secure in the knowledge that they would not lose their
interest if the debtor died. Therefore, today Juan and Maria would be
presumed to be tenants in common.
Of course, as in many legal situations, the best approach to this
problem is to avoid it by advance planning. The law permits people to
specify what kind of relationship is being created, and good lawyers
typically do so. If you open a bank account with a family member, for
example, you will see that one of the boxes that can be checked to indicate the form of ownership is labeled “Joint tenant with right of survivorship,” a clear indication that the intention is not to create a tenancy
in common. Scrupulous belt-and-suspenders lawyers may add “and not
as tenants in common,” to remove any doubt. The attorney drafting the
mother’s will likewise could have expressly provided for a joint tenancy,
if that is what the mother intended.
What is it that a cotenant owns? Joint tenants and tenants in common
hold substantially the same bundle of rights in the property. In either
case, each cotenant possesses an undivided interest in the entire property.
“Undivided” means that Juan and Maria each have a right to use the entire house; they do not have to physically divide the house, so that Juan
has use of the kitchen and Maria the living room. If they rent out the
house rather than live in it, they share in the rent paid equally (if they are
joint tenants) or according to their ownership interests in the property (if
they are tenants in common).
If Juan and Maria are tenants in common, on Juan’s death his heirs
will inherit his interest in the property. If they are joint tenants, however,
Maria owns the entire property on Juan’s death. If Juan wants to prevent this, so that his children can inherit his share of the property, for
example, he can, by various means, sever the joint tenancy, converting it
into a tenancy in common and thereby destroying Maria’s right of survivorship. Tenancies by the entirety are different in this respect, however.
Because one of the purposes of this form of co-ownership is to protect
the surviving spouse, the right of survivorship cannot be destroyed in a
tenancy by the entirety.
Law 101
242
Tenancy by the entirety is one form of property ownership between
a married couple. Beyond that, a special set of rules has been applied
throughout history to marital property, and again the rules change as the
social system changes.
In the old common law a husband and wife were treated as one person
in the eyes of property law, and that person was the husband. The husband controlled all property owned by either of them, so he could sell
land owned by the wife or control its use without her consent. The wife’s
only protection was a right in the husband’s property on his death.
Under the rule of dower, a widow had a claim for as long as she lived to
one-third of all of her husband’s real property that otherwise would be
inherited by the children. A widower had a parallel, and greater right,
called curtesy, which granted him a life interest in all of the lands owned
by the wife.
In the middle of the nineteenth century all of the states passed Married
Women’s Property Acts, which granted married women the same rights
to manage their property as possessed by single women and married
men. Today marital property is governed by one of two systems of law,
called separate property (in effect in most states) and community property (which controls in a few states, mostly those which in colonial
times were governed by the civil law, such as California, Texas, and
Louisiana).
In separate property jurisdictions, the property of a husband and wife
is, naturally, separate. If a wife owns a piece of land or some stock, she
can use or dispose of it as she wishes, without the consent of her husband. During the marriage, the only limitation on her bundle of rights is
the duty of one spouse to support another; the wife cannot enjoy her own
property and leave her husband destitute (and vice versa). Spouses can,
of course, choose to own property jointly. Upon divorce, the property of
each spouse is subject to equitable distribution. The court granting the
divorce has great discretion to divide the property between the spouses
on an equitable, or fair, basis, taking into account who contributed to
the property and who needs it after the divorce.
In community property jurisdictions, property owned by each spouse
before the marriage, or property acquired during the marriage by one
of them by gift or inheritance, is separate property of each spouse and
is treated the same as property in a separate property state. Property
otherwise acquired during the marriage, though, including property
that is derived from the earnings of either spouse, is community property. Community property is much like property held in joint tenancy.
Each spouse has an independent right to use the community property
without the consent of the other spouse. Either spouse can also convey
Property Law
243
the property, except for land and certain business assets, which requires
the consent of both spouses. Upon divorce, some community property
states divide the community property evenly between the two spouses;
others use equitable distribution principles to divide the property.
An important limitation on a spouse’s bundle of rights is a restriction on the ability to dispose of his or her property upon death. In most
states, the ability of a spouse to dispose of property on death is limited by
the rule of an elective share, discussed in the section above on property
transfers on death. The elective share operates somewhat like dower and
curtesy at common law. No matter what a will says, the surviving spouse
may claim a certain portion of the deceased spouse’s assets to provide
the surviving spouse a measure of protection against being deprived of
the financial benefits of the marriage.
How Else Can Ownership of Property Be Shared?
In joint tenancy and tenancy in common, each person is the owner of
the property, though he or she shares that ownership with someone
else. There is another way in which people can share interests in real
property, which falls under the legal category of servitude. The concept
is most easily understood with a few examples. To provide telephone
service, the phone company has to run its cables across many people’s
land, either underground or on poles. Two neighbors share a wall that
straddles both their property at the border line, and each contributes to
the cost of maintaining the wall. Homeowners in a subdivision purchase
by deeds that prohibit them from building more than one home on their
lot, even though there is no zoning that prevents subdividing. A patron
at a movie theater occupies some of the theater owner’s property—a
seat—for the duration of the movie.
What all of these examples have in common is that one person has
an interest in someone else’s property. The interest may attach as a result of property ownership (the neighbor who shares a wall) or not (the
theatergoer). The interest may allow the person to do something (sit in
the theater), require someone else to do something (help maintain the
wall), or prevent someone else from doing something (subdividing a lot).
In each case the landowner who is subject to the obligation has had one
element of the bundle of rights of full property ownership taken away
and transferred to the other person.
As a doctrinal matter there are important differences among these
kinds of rights. We say that the theatergoer has a license to use the theater owner’s property because she has permission to enter the property
for a limited time and purpose. Licenses are revocable; look on the back
Law 101
244
of a ticket stub for a movie and you may see language to the effect that
the management can revoke the license at any time. The telephone company has an easement, a durable right to use someone else’s property.
The subdivision owners have real covenants or equitable servitudes that
restrict each other’s use of their lots; these are devices that grant control
over the use of someone else’s property rather than the right to use it
oneself.
We won’t try to understand the law of servitudes in any great detail
here. It has been described as “an unspeakable quagmire” full of archaic
terms, fine distinctions, and confusing rules that bedevil even the most
diligent law students. But we can use the topic to illustrate a few basic
points about property law.
First, servitudes are a form of private regulation of property and land
use. People begin by holding the entire bundle of rights that constitute
property ownership and then cede some of those rights in the form of
easements, covenants, and so on. (Sometimes servitudes don’t arise from
express agreements but from implication of an agreement, although that
is less common.) The ability to act this way is an element of both the ownership of property and the ability to contract. Each gives the individual
a sphere of autonomy to create this kind of obligation and to define its
content. Servitudes have been valuable in controlling land development
and creating particular types of residential environments through private
action, particularly in suburban subdivisions and planned communities.
Second, the law of servitudes is not the law of contracts. The development of a distinct body of law illustrates the power of the concept
of property, especially real property. Because these obligations are not
unique to the parties but attach to their land, and may benefit or burden
subsequent owners of the land, they are burdened by history and the
trappings of property law.
Third, as contract and property, the ability to do what one wants with
one’s property is not absolute. Servitudes are subject to direct and indirect public policy restrictions. The best-known direct restriction is the
prohibition on discriminatory covenants. Through the mid-twentieth
century it was common for deeds to contain covenants prohibiting any
future owner from selling the property to nonwhites. The courts eventually declared the enforcement of that type of restriction unconstitutional;
a private owner’s right of property was limited by the paramount social
concern against racial discrimination. Limits on the use of servitudes are
still frequently litigated, as in cases in which a homeowners’ association
enforces draconian building restrictions, or a covenant requiring singlefamily houses is claimed to prevent the establishment of a group home
for the intellectually challenged.
Property Law
245
One other way that property ownership can be shared occurs when
different people can own different interests in a piece of property at the
same time but their interests are divided over time. The issue is steeped
in medieval history, most of which we can ignore, but it is an interesting
illustration of the conflicts that underlie all of property law.
Suppose that Gerald O’Hara wants to preserve Tara as his family’s ancestral plantation. In his will, he gives the land to Scarlett for her life, and
then, on her death, the property would pass to her children, and then her
children’s children, and so on as long as O’Hara had heirs. Or suppose
that O’Hara bequeaths his plantation to the state of Georgia, on the
condition that the state is to use the property as an arboretum, planting
at least two of every variety of tree native to Georgia. If the state met the
condition for 99 years, the property would go to the state outright; if it
did not, ownership would revert to O’Hara or his heirs.
In both of these examples we can see that different people have
different temporal relationships to the property. In the first example,
when O’Hara dies, Scarlett has ownership of the property for her life,
but a kind of ownership that is limited by the condition that the property
would pass to her child upon her death. In the second hypothetical, he
gives up ownership of the plantation to the state, but his heirs still have
an interest in it: the possibility that, if the state fails to maintain the arboretum, the property will revert back to them.
The examples are related to the fundamental issue of how much we
will let owners control their property over time. O’Hara owns Tara in
fee simple, which means that he owns as many of the rights as anyone
can have in the property. Clearly he can give away his land, during his
lifetime or upon his death, so one might think that he could perform the
lesser act of giving it away with a condition attached (that it be used for
an arboretum) or give away only a part interest (to Scarlett for her life,
then to her child).
But we want current owners of property to be able to use it productively, too. How much should we let the dead hand of the past control
the present use of property? Imagine what might happen if we let owners
impose lasting restrictions on the use or disposition of property. Some
property owners would dream of family dynasties and would attempt to
keep property in the family by imposing the kind of restriction O’Hara
did in his will. Over time, this would tend to concentrate property in
fewer and fewer hands, rather than making it available to a wider population. Or the opposite might occur; several generations down the line,
tiny pieces of Tara might be owned by dozens of O’Hara’s descendants.
The same problems arise with restrictions outside a family.
Conditions change over time, and it may not always make sense to
Law 101
246
honor restrictions placed on property by a previous owner. After
twenty or fifty or seventy years, the state of Georgia may decide that
Tara could better be used as a playground, a library, or a hospital instead of an arboretum, but enforcing O’Hara’s restriction would prevent such a use.
Accordingly, courts have had to balance the desire to let people
do whatever they want with their property against the unfortunate
consequences that would result from enforcing all such restrictions.
They have done so in a number of ways. Often a grantor will not be clear
about what kind of interest is being created or what kind of restriction
is being imposed. In those cases, courts develop presumptions, assuming
for example, that grantors do not intend to encumber their land with
restrictions unless they do so clearly.
A second technique of dealing with arguably outmoded restrictions is
through the use of the cy pres doctrine (meaning “as near as”). Under
the doctrine, when a charitable bequest cannot be fulfilled in exactly the
way the donor intended, the court will find a way to carry it into effect
as nearly as possible to effectuate the donor’s intention.
A third technique is to use certain substantive rules that simply prohibit certain kinds of dead hand restrictions. An example is the Rule
against Perpetuities, a major step in the law’s effort to control dynastic
wealth. The Rule states that a future interest in property must vest—must
become final—within twenty-one years of the death of someone who is
alive at the time the interest is created. The Rule against Perpetuities has
tormented law students for generations; the California Supreme Court
once stated that the rule is so complicated that it is not malpractice
for a lawyer to fail to understand it, and its strictures have been modified by statute in most states. But the basic concept is simple. A landowner cannot tie up the land forever by creating interests that will not
arise for generations to come. Under the rule, O’Hara’s attempt to have
successive generations of his heirs each hold only a life interest in Tara
would be invalid.
What Are the Property Rights of a Landlord and a Tenant?
Leases are a very common form of holding property, from a short-term
lease of an apartment to a long-term lease of commercial office space.
A lease is a particular form of shared use of property in which the owner,
known as the landlord or the lessor, permits the tenant or lessee to use
the property for a period of time. Everyone is familiar with the practice of leasing, but the concept presents particularly interesting property
law issues. What are the relations between landlord and tenant? How
Property Law
247
much are those relations prescribed by law? And to what degree can the
parties direct those relations by agreement?
Landlord and tenant law has seen some historic shifts concerning
the answers to those questions, with some of the most important shifts
occurring relatively recently. Let’s consider two of the shifts and some
of their implications for current law: the change from a property-based
conception of the lease to a conception that incorporates elements of
contract, and the increasing regulation of the relationship between landlord and tenant.
From an early point in English law, a lease was considered to be a
conveyance of a property interest. The owner would, in effect, give up
ownership for a period of years to the tenant, who became, in a sense,
the new “owner” for that time, subject to the promise to pay rent and
to perform certain other limited obligations. Although the lease relationship originated in the agreement between the landlord and tenant,
it was essentially a property relationship, not a contract. Therefore, the
basic duty of the landlord was to transfer the property for the specified
time, and the basic duty of the tenant was to pay rent and return the
property at the end of the lease. The law placed few other obligations
on either party.
This model fit the traditional lease of agricultural land very well, but
it became outmoded. Beginning in the nineteenth century, the renting of
residential or commercial property became much more common than
the lease of farmland. In a residential lease, especially in a crowded
urban apartment, the tenant relied on the landlord for maintaining the
condition of the premises, controlling the behavior of other tenants, and
providing services such as heat and hot water. In many urban housing
markets, the tenant’s options and bargaining power were limited.
Meanwhile, parties to commercial leases increasingly negotiated the precise terms of the lease, spelling out the obligations in much greater detail than the law had previously. These changes encouraged courts and
legislatures to think differently about the landlord–tenant relationship.
The changes were further spurred in the 1960s by the availability of
legal services to the poor, the activism of the civil rights movement, and
the perception of a housing crisis, among other social factors. As a result,
the legal view of a lease shifted from the pure transfer of a property interest to a relationship that had many contractual aspects, and, at least
with respect to residential leases, the content of the contract was more
closely regulated by the law.
Probably the most important area in which the changed thinking was
felt concerned the landlord’s obligation concerning the condition of the
premises. Traditionally, the lease was seen as a conveyance of a property
Law 101
248
interest, so the conveyance was complete when the landlord gave the
tenant possession of the premises. The landlord was obligated to turn
the premises over to the tenant but was not obligated to deliver or maintain them in a livable condition. If the landlord failed to provide heat or
hot water, for example, the tenant was out of luck.
The leading case shifting the conception of landlord and tenant rights
was Javins v. First National Realty Corp., a 1970 decision of the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. The case was part of
a litigation campaign by tenants’ attorneys to advance tenants’ rights.
First National, the landlord, sought to evict the tenants for nonpayment
of rent. The tenants admitted that they had not paid rent but responded
that housing code violations in their apartments entitled them to a setoff
in damages equal to the rent due. The court first noted the changes in the
situation property law faced. Treating a lease as a conveyance of property made sense in an agrarian society, but the apartment-dwellers were
seeking something more than a conveyance of farmland:
When American city-dwellers, both rich and poor, seek “shelter”
today, they seek a well-known package of goods and services—
a package which includes not merely walls and ceilings, but
also adequate heat, light and ventilation, serviceable plumbing
facilities, secure windows and doors, proper sanitation and proper
maintenance.
Accordingly, it was appropriate to treat a lease more as a contract.
In contracts cases, consumer protection had been expanded by, for example, implying that the manufacturer of a product guaranteed its safety
and effectiveness. The same principle controlled with residential leases.
The court implied a warranty of habitability, which required that the
landlord keep the premises in compliance with the housing code.
Following Javins, the implied warranty of habitability in residential
housing became well established in most jurisdictions, either through judicial decision or legislation. In some states the warranty adopts the local
housing code as the standard for the landlord’s performance; in other
cases the warranty is more general, requiring perhaps that the dwelling
be “fit and suitable for human habitation.” Sometimes any residence is
covered; in other places, only multiunit apartment buildings are covered.
Since the move to an implied warranty is in part a recognition that the
lease is as much a contract as a transfer of a property interest, the logical question is how much freedom the parties have to define the terms
of their relationship. Can the lease include an agreement by the tenant
to waive the implied warranty of habitability? Under modern contract
Property Law
249
and property principles, the answer is usually no. Otherwise, landlords
could negate the effect of the implied warranty by including a broad
disclaimer in a form lease, and few tenants would be knowledgeable
enough or have enough bargaining power to demand that the disclaimer
be excluded.
Because the implied warranty is in part contract-based, the remedies
available to the tenant have been expanded. Many remedies are available. As with any contract, the tenant can sue for money damages for
breach of the warranty. Or the tenant can repair and deduct, fixing the
apartment to correct the landlord’s violation and then deducting the cost
of doing so from the rent. The tenant also can use the damage claim defensively, refusing to pay rent and, if sued by the landlord, asserting the
breach of warranty as a defense; if the court agrees that the apartment
is uninhabitable, the tenant can remain without paying rent until the violation is repaired.
When Can the Government Take Your Property?
Inherent in the idea of property is that property is private; your property
is yours, you can do what you want with it, and the government can’t
take it away from you. But that’s not entirely true. Suppose the state is
planning to build a highway which, unfortunately, is going to be routed
through your backyard. Can you refuse to allow the highway to come
through, causing the state to reroute it at great expense and inconvenience? No. If the state insists, it can build the highway through your
property even over your objection, by taking the property from you.
However, because it is your property, the state has to pay you for it.
Short of actually taking your property away from you, the government has the authority to regulate your use of the property. But how
much? Many municipal zoning laws prevent the operation of a factory
in a residential area. Some suburban communities require homeowners
to keep their grass neatly trimmed. Wetlands, pinelands, and beachfront
preservation regulations may prevent construction altogether in environmentally sensitive areas. Can the government lawfully regulate property to this extent?
Let’s begin with the most extreme limitation on private property, the
government’s ability to take private property. This ability is known as
the power of eminent domain. When the government determines that
it needs private property for a public purpose, it can condemn the
property—in effect purchasing it from the owner whether the owner
wants to sell or not. The eminent domain power is an inherent power
of government; the federal and state governments possess the power to
Law 101
250
condemn property as an essential part of being a government. Indeed, in
the early Republic it was often held that private property could be taken
without even paying for it. Federal and state constitutions do provide
a limitation on the power, however. The Fifth Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution states: “Nor shall private property be taken for public use
without just compensation.” The government may condemn land, but it
must pay a fair price for it.
The degree to which eminent domain has long been accepted as an
inherent power of government makes clear that property is never wholly
private. There is a public interest in the ownership of property, but when
the public interest requires that property be taken, there is no barrier to
doing so.
The typical condemnation case—the homeowner whose yard will be
the site of a new highway—is legally simple. The state brings a condemnation proceeding to take the land and to establish the just compensation. Determining what is just compensation in a particular case may be
factually complex, but it basically means establishing the market value
of the property. But other cases present tough issues. To exercise the
eminent domain power, the property taken must be used for a public
purpose. Building a highway for everyone’s use obviously serves a public
purpose, but what about less traditional activities of government? In a
series of cases, the Supreme Court has shown great deference to the legislative determination of what is a public use or purpose justifying eminent domain. In Berman v. Parker (1954), the Court allowed the District
of Columbia to take by eminent domain a department store located in
a blighted area, even though the store itself was economically viable
and not blighted, because of the validity of the redevelopment plan for
the area as a whole. In Hawaii Housing Authority v. Midkiff (1984), it
upheld legislation by the state of Hawai’i that allowed tenants to petition the housing authority to have the land they rented taken away
from the private landlord and sold to them, in order to promote more
equitable distribution and an open market for land. In both cases, the
Court said, “Subject to specific constitutional limitations, when the legislature has spoken, the public interest has been declared in terms wellnigh conclusive.”
As states’ use of the eminent domain power expanded, the question of
how far a public purpose extended became more controversial, and the
Court returned to the issue in 2005 in the much-debated case of Kelo
v. City of New London. New London, Connecticut, embarked on the economic revitalization of its Fort Trumbull area, with its efforts managed by
the private, nonprofit New London Development Corporation (NLDC).
After an extensive planning process, NLDC finalized a development plan
Property Law
251
for the area that included a hotel, shops, and restaurants in an “urban
village,” a Coast Guard museum, new residences, office and retail space,
and a marina. The plan required NLDC to acquire the property of 115
owners in the area, most of whom sold at negotiated prices. Nine owners
refused to sell at the prices offered by NLDC, or perhaps at all, including
such long-time residents as Wilhelmina Dery, who was born in her Fort
Trumbull house in 1918 and had lived there her entire life. The owners
challenged the exercise of eminent domain, claiming that the redevelopment plan did not constitute a public use because the area was not
blighted and the plan would simply transfer their property from one
private owner to another, without being open to a public use as constitutionally required. The Court rejected their challenge, holding that
community economic development is a valid public purpose. The constitutional requirement of “public use” did not mean that the property
physically be open to the public. Instead, the requirement long had been
interpreted to mean that the legislature had determined that the public
would benefit from the new use of the land, as when courts upheld statutes that allowed mill dams to flood upstream landowners or a mining
company to transport ore buckets over other owners’ property, or, as
in Berman and Hawaii Housing Authority, when land was redeveloped
or even simply transferred to a new owner. According to the Court, it
was the task of the legislature, not the courts, to draw the lines about
what constitutes a public purpose: “For more than a century, our public
use jurisprudence has wisely eschewed rigid formulas and intrusive scrutiny in favor of affording legislatures broad latitude in determining what
public needs justify the use of the takings power.” Four justices dissented,
arguing that the majority had effectively deleted the public use requirement from the takings clause. As Justice O’Connor stated, “All private
property is now vulnerable to being taken and transferred to another
private owner, so long as it might be upgraded—i.e., given to an owner
who will use it in a way that the legislature deems more beneficial to the
public—in the process.” Most of the states enacted legislation in response
to the Court’s decision in Kelo. Most statutes ostensibly prevented the
exercise of eminent domain for economic development or the transfer of
property to private developers, but many contained exceptions that limited their effect, permitting, for example, takings of “blighted” property
or those that are in the way of “sound growth.”
Suppose that instead of taking the property of one of the complaining
landowners, New London had passed an ordinance stating that the
property had to be used as parking lots for some of the new retail shops.
Then the landowners could complain that the government had taken
their land in reality, if not in form, and the state should be required to
Law 101
252
pay just compensation for doing so. In that kind of case, the landowners
could bring an inverse condemnation action complaining about a regulatory taking and require the government to pay. Most cases are less
egregious than that, but where do we draw the line?
The Supreme Court has tried to draw the line in a series of cases
from the early part of the twentieth century. Its basic principle was that
regulating the use of land is a valid exercise of the police power; if the
legislature determined that regulating even to the extent of practically
eliminating its value was necessary to prevent public harm, its decision
would be respected; only taking away all the value of land without a
corresponding public benefit is a taking. In the Penn Central case in
1978, for example, the Court allowed New York City to prevent the
construction of an office tower atop Grand Central Station in order to
preserve the station’s historic architecture (Penn Central Transportation
Co. v. City of New York).
Beginning in the late 1970s, however, conservative activists pressed litigation that challenged the long-standing rules, and the changing membership of the Court sometimes provided a responsive audience. The
activism arose as conservatives challenged environmental protection legislation and as home builders and other developers challenged zoning
and other land-use regulations.
In Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal Council (1992), a majority of the
Court adopted what it called a categorical rule: When a property owner
is deprived of the economically beneficial use of his property, even if the
regulation is crafted by the legislature to prevent harm to the public, the
regulation constitutes a taking of property unless it falls within the traditional common law category of nuisance. Thus the state had taken the
property of an owner of two lots on a barrier island when it enacted a
statute that prevented development too close to the shoreline, in order
to prevent erosion and other damage. While the decision raised as many
questions as it answered, it did signal the Court’s willingness to expand
the takings doctrine into the realm of what traditionally had been valid
police power regulation.
The Court also changed traditional rules defining what kind of burdens
could be imposed on new development. Often when a landowner seeks
approval for a new development, the government requires in return some
dedication of land to the public or some land improvements to support
the development, such as parkland or streets. Traditionally, as long as
there is a reasonable relation between the exaction and the development, the government’s action is a valid exercise of the police power, not
a taking. In Nolan v. California Coastal Commission (1987) and Dolan
v. City of Tigard (1994), however, the Court held that unless there was a
Property Law
253
close link and a rough proportionality between the burden imposed by
the development and the exaction, the regulation was a taking. In Dolan,
for example, a store owner had applied for a building permit to expand
the size of her store. The city conditioned the permit on the store owner’s
dedicating a strip of land as a pedestrian and bicycle pathway. The Court
invalidated the condition because the city had not demonstrated that the
pathway would be needed for the additional customer traffic generated
by the new construction.
Since Lucas, however, the Court has been ambivalent about how far
to alter the traditional rules. For example, activists argued that Lucas
should be applied to any part of an interest in property, so that if the government prevents the use of property for a period of time, that is a deprivation of all economically beneficial use for that time and therefore a
taking. In Tahoe-Sierra Preservation Council v. Tahoe Regional Planning
Agency (2002) the Court disagreed, holding that a two-and-a-half-year
moratorium on land development for planning purposes did not constitute a taking because it was only a temporary regulation of all of the
rights in the property. On the other hand, in Horne v. Department of
Agriculture (2015), the Court held that compensation is required whenever personal property is taken, and the prospect of the owner receiving
some payment for the property taken did not change the situation. New
Deal legislation authorized the secretary of agriculture to issue orders
requiring growers of certain agricultural products to set aside a portion
of their crops for the government, free of charge, in order to stabilize the
markets for those products. The Hornes refused to give the government
a portion of their raisin crop and were fined. The Court regarded a fine
as equivalent to a physical appropriation of their raisins and the fact that
they would receive proceeds from the government’s sale of their raisins
was irrelevant, so the order constituted a taking.

8
Crime Doesn’t Pay
Criminal Law
Criminal law absorbs our attention in a way that no other body of law
does. Horrific crimes, juicy tales of passion, and mundane muggings occupy the news media and public attention. Criminal law is a hot political topic that has immediate personal dimensions. But, as elsewhere in
the law, the issues are more complicated than they seem. This chapter is
designed to help you think in different, more broad-ranging ways about
criminal responsibility.
What Is Criminal Law?
Criminal law is, of course, about punishing the bad guys. To define criminal law, we need to distinguish it from other bodies of law that do something like that and to distinguish the substantive criminal law from the
process that applies it.
Suppose three teenagers (call them Tom, Dick, and Harry) go on a
minor crime spree at the mall, shoplifting in some stores, writing graffiti on the walls, and rudely bumping into other customers. Have they
committed any crimes? Think about why their conduct may be criminal
and how else we might characterize it.
Shoplifting is certainly a crime. A state statute defines theft as, roughly,
taking something that doesn’t belong to you. Tom, Dick, and Harry can
be prosecuted for the crime. By prosecuted, we mean that a state official
(commonly the district attorney) will bring a proceeding in court to have
them found guilty of criminal conduct and punished for their acts, typically by being fined or sent to jail.
The criminal prosecution is not the only proceeding that can be
brought, however. First, the store owner can bring a civil action against
them because the same conduct constitutes the tort of conversion—
taking someone else’s property. In the civil action, the store owner
Law 101
256
receives money damages from the defendants—not a fine, but compensation for her lost property. Second, if Tom is only fourteen years old,
the district attorney might decide to proceed against him as a juvenile.
A juvenile proceeding is not a criminal proceeding. It is not designed primarily to punish Tom but to provide for the correction of his behavior;
even if he is sent to a juvenile detention facility, the law doesn’t think of
that as criminal punishment. Third, and similarly, if Dick is found to be
suffering from mental illness that causes him to uncontrollably assault
mall patrons, a family member or the district attorney might bring an
action to have him committed to a psychiatric institution for treatment.
In this action, the question is not whether Dick has committed a crime
but whether he is dangerous to himself or others. Even though he may
be involuntarily deprived of his liberty, he has not been found guilty
of a crime. All of these are noncriminal sanctions because only—and
always—criminal law involves a determination of guilt, or criminal responsibility, in a proceeding brought by the state, for which legally defined punishment may be imposed.
What if Harry receives a speeding ticket on his way to the mall? Is that
a crime? Speeding is an offense for which Harry can be prosecuted, and
he can receive a public punishment (a fine) for committing the offense.
But we usually distinguish relatively minor violations of the law, like
speeding, from more serious offenses, like drunk driving, and label only
the latter as crimes.
Next, suppose that Harry is prosecuted for the crime of battery for
rudely bumping into Jill, a mall patron, and knocking her to the ground.
At trial Jill testifies that although she didn’t know Harry she really didn’t
mind being knocked down, she wasn’t hurt too badly, and she thought
teenagers ought to be able to have some fun. Does that get Harry off the
hook? No; he still can be convicted. Harry’s behavior, like all crimes, is
criminal not because it is a wrong against another person but because
it is a wrong against the public good. The state has determined what
behavior is wrongful, and the state can punish that behavior even if the
victim doesn’t care.
Now suppose that the district attorney decides to prosecute Tom,
the fourteen-year-old, as an adult for shoplifting. (In most states, the
prosecutor has that choice.) At trial the store’s video security camera
tape reveals that Tom didn’t actually mean to steal the DVD that he is
accused of taking. Instead, he bumped into a store counter and, without
his knowing it, the DVD fell into a bag he was carrying. Tom would be
acquitted—found not to have committed a crime. Why? In nearly every
case, criminal law has a culpability requirement: Someone must intend
to commit a crime or at least be very careless (as in running someone
Criminal Law
257
over when driving drunk). One of the distinctive features of criminal law
is that it embodies an idea of blameworthiness. Someone must have done
something wrong, something that deserves moral condemnation, before
a criminal sanction may be imposed. To deserve condemnation, it’s not
enough that someone commit a bad act; he or she also must have done
so with a bad state of mind.
When we put all of these hypotheticals together, we see that it is actually harder to define the scope of criminal law in a systematic way
than it first appears. Violations of criminal law are prosecuted by the
government, but the government brings other types of actions as well.
Violations result in negative sanctions but so do civil lawsuits, prosecution of minor infractions, and administrative proceedings, and not all
negative sanctions in criminal cases are that harmful to the recipients.
The core of criminal law, then, is moral condemnation and punishment based on blameworthiness. A crime is a wrong that deserves punishment because the criminal has violated public standards of morality.
Even this definition is not perfect, but it captures the essence of what
distinguishes criminal law from other bodies of law.
The hypotheticals also suggest what the issues are in any criminal
case. First, has the defendant committed an act that is prohibited by the
criminal law? The crime of theft requires that someone take property
that does not belong to him or her. To convict Tom of shoplifting, the
prosecutor would have to prove that Tom did that. If he had not walked
out of the store with an item, or if he had paid for it, he would not have
performed the prohibited act. Second, has the defendant performed the
act with a culpable state of mind? Theft requires not only that the defendant take someone else’s property but that he do so with knowledge
that the property belongs to someone else. If Tom believes that a bin
near the front of a music store contains free DVDs, he does not commit
theft if he takes one without paying for it. Third, if the defendant has
committed a criminal act with a culpable state of mind, does he have
a defense? Dick’s mental illness might be a defense. Fourth, if the defendant has not committed a prohibited act with the requisite state of
culpability, might he still be criminally liable? Suppose Tom, Dick, and
Harry agree to go on a shoplifting spree but Harry doesn’t actually steal
anything. Could he be liable anyway for agreeing to be part of the gang?
There is one other essential distinction between substantive criminal law (which is the subject of this chapter) and criminal procedure
(which is examined in Chapter 9). Criminal law states general principles
of criminal liability and defines what behavior is criminal. It helps answer questions such as: What’s the difference between murder and manslaughter? What constitutes legal insanity? Criminal procedure concerns
Law 101
258
the process by which criminal behavior is investigated and adjudicated.
When must the police read a suspect his Miranda rights? What does it
mean to have a fair trial?
The substantive criminal law often is divided into two parts: general
principles of criminal liability and definition of specific crimes. The general principles of criminal liability cut across all of the definitions of specific crimes. First, if criminal law prohibits wrongful acts of various kinds,
what do we mean by an “act”? Specific crimes prohibit specific acts (such
as taking someone else’s property), but what are the basic requirements
for the kind of conduct that is criminal? Second, because criminal acts are
culpable only when accompanied by a blameworthy mental state, how
do we define the mental states that will lead to criminal liability? The
law defines a range of relevant mental states, and the courts apply those
definitions in interpreting criminal statutes. Third, when is someone justified or excused in doing an act that otherwise would be criminal? A criminal act might be justified if doing the act avoids some greater harm.
Self-defense, for example, is a principle of justification. Similarly, an act
is excused when for some reason the actor is blameless in performing
it. A person suffering from a mental disease or defect may intend to kill
someone else but still lack the blameworthiness necessary to declare his
behavior criminal. Fourth, when may someone be liable for acts that are
preliminary to a crime, or further a crime, but may not fit the elements of
a specific offense? One who attempts to commit a crime but fails is generally liable for the attempt, but how close does she have to come before
she has committed a crime? Similarly, if a group of criminals participate
in a conspiracy to rob a bank and one of them shoots a guard during the
robbery, are all of the others liable for murder?
The definition of specific criminal offenses obviously concerns what
acts and accompanying mental states are necessary to convict a person
of a crime. For example, what are the differences among murder, voluntary manslaughter, and involuntary manslaughter?
Creating the general principles of criminal law and defining the specific
offenses was once the province of the courts. In the twentieth century,
however, legislatures began to enact comprehensive codes of criminal
law. In the 1950s and 1960s the American Law Institute, a private body
of lawyers, judges, and professors, drafted a Model Penal Code to serve
as a guide to state legislatures in adopting criminal legislation. The effort
was very successful; about three-fourths of the states have adopted codes
based on this guide. Each state has departed from the model in some
ways, and legislatures keep rewriting the law as issues continue to arise,
but the Model Penal Code provides a useful takeoff point for discussion
of the state of the criminal law generally.
Criminal Law
259
The sections that follow discuss the general principles of criminal liability and the definition of some of the most important and most interesting specific offenses. But before getting into the details, consider the
most fundamental issue of all: Why do we need criminal law?
Why Do We Need Criminal Law?
This should be obvious. We need criminal law to punish criminals and
prevent crime. But as we’ve seen with the other legal concepts in this
book, it’s not that simple.
The first purpose criminal law serves is to define what behavior society regards as wrongful. It is wrong to murder your neighbor, set fire
to her house, or steal her lawnmower. The acts defined as criminal often
(but not always) have the most serious consequences for others; murder
and arson are very harmful, but stealing your neighbor’s lawnmower
probably is less of a social evil than manufacturing lawnmowers without
adequate safety devices, which is only a civil wrong. What distinguishes
criminal offenses from other wrongful acts is that, as a class, they are
particularly worthy of social condemnation. Just because an act is not
criminal does not mean that it is not wrongful; we condemn other behavior in other ways, such as through the imposition of tort liability or
simple social disapproval.
Condemnation of wrongful behavior isn’t enough for criminal law.
Criminal acts are so wrongful that when someone commits a criminal
act as distinguished from some other type of wrong, she is not just made
to pay damages or snubbed at the country club; she is punished. So in
considering why we have criminal law, the real question is why we have
criminal punishment. Answering this question is supremely important
for criminal law; figuring out why we punish will also tell us who we
should punish, how, and to what degree.
Criminal law theorists offer two kinds of justification for punishing
criminals, called the utilitarian and retributivist positions. Utilitarians
view criminal law as useful, in that punishing criminals benefits society.
Retributivists see the primary role of criminal law as retribution; in other
words, criminals are punished because they deserve it.
Utilitarianism is the theory that society ought to be organized to promote the greatest good for the greatest number of people. Criminal
law, in the view of the utilitarian, serves the social good primarily by
preventing crime. Punishing criminals may prevent crime in several
ways. Imprisoning a criminal prevents him from committing another
crime while he is incarcerated; executing a criminal prevents him from
ever committing another crime. (This is commonly called restraint or
Law 101
260
incapacitation.) Individual deterrence or specific deterrence assumes
that once someone has been punished for a crime, he or she may be less
likely to commit another crime. The threat of punishment in general—
general deterrence—discourages people from committing crimes. Placing
criminals in a restrictive environment where they can receive treatment,
counseling, and education may lead them away from a life of crime; it
may rehabilitate them. And public knowledge of criminal punishments
reinforces people’s sense of the importance of the standards of behavior
of the criminal law, by denunciation.
Let’s begin with rehabilitation. Criminal punishment can prevent
crime by changing criminals. Once someone has been convicted of a
crime, he or she can be given counseling, psychological treatment, education, or moral examples, either in prison or while on probation, to
turn the person from a life of crime to law-abiding behavior. The rehabilitative ideal was extremely important, perhaps dominant, in criminal law through most of the twentieth century. With rehabilitation as
a goal, criminal law and punishment focused on the criminal, not the
crime. Judges attempted to individualize sentences to meet the rehabilitative needs of an individual criminal, prisons offered a wide range
of opportunities for education and reform, and release from prison on
parole was based on evidence that the convict had been rehabilitated.
Of course, prisons were never really treatment centers, and the resources that might have been needed to fulfill the rehabilitative ideal
were never provided, but at least the concept was an important part
of the system.
Rehabilitation as a purpose of the criminal law has declined in recent years because its critics argued that we don’t have a good sense of
what works. A series of widely publicized studies in the 1970s asserted
that all of the efforts at rehabilitation had little effect on rates of recidivism, or criminals’ tendency to repeat their crimes. Some rehabilitative
programs might work under some circumstances, but we have no firm
basis for knowing which is which, so constructing a system of criminal
punishment on rehabilitation is arbitrary at best and irrational at worst.
In the face of that criticism and the growing public concern that we
needed to get tough on crime, rehabilitation has faded as an objective of
criminal law.
Incapacitation ought to have an obvious effect on crime: If we put
criminals in prison where they cannot commit more crimes, crime will be
reduced. The underlying assumption is that at least some criminals are
prone to commit more crimes. We may not be able to rehabilitate these
repeat offenders, but we can prevent them from committing crimes by
removing them from society, at least for a time.
Criminal Law
261
The problem with incapacitation is an empirical problem akin to the
problem with rehabilitation. We would find it unjust to sentence all
criminals to long prison terms just because some of them will commit
more crimes, so incapacitation demands the ability to predict who is
likely to be a repeat offender. For a time the law attempted to individualize this judgment; judges in sentencing, for example, would consider a criminal’s background, education, social circumstances, and even
psychological profile in an attempt to determine how likely he was to
commit another crime, and thus craft an appropriate sentence. More
recently the attempt has been made to predict future criminality on a
large-scale or systematic basis, focusing more on the nature of the crime
and objective factors in the offender’s background. But as with rehabilitation, the system’s reach may exceed its grasp. The evidence suggests
that we are not in a good position to predict future behavior; in fact, the
tendency is to overpredict criminality, so that people who are not likely
to commit future crimes are held in prison for unnecessarily long periods
of time.
Denunciation reduces crime by reinforcing people’s views of the
wrongfulness of criminal behavior. Declaring an act criminal and punishing an offender does more than make a moral statement; it strengthens
the public’s tendency to be law-abiding. Most people want to do what
is right, and public knowledge of criminal punishment reinforces the
perception of what is right. Most people also want to be treated fairly;
if they have the sense that many other people are getting away with
breaking the law, they may be more likely to break the law themselves.
In this indirect way, the criminal process reduces the incidence of crime.
Rehabilitation, incapacitation, and denunciation have their adherents,
but the main utilitarian justification of criminal law is deterrence.
Deterrence assumes that people act rationally, weighing the potential
costs and benefits of what they do. If society wants to prevent people
from acting in certain ways, it only has to increase the cost of acting
in those ways. Making robbery a crime punishable by imprisonment
discourages people from robbing. For behavior that is more wrongful,
we have only to increase the penalty to increase the deterrent—burglary
may be punishable by five years in prison, robbery by ten years, and
murder may involve capital punishment.
The threat of punishment is general deterrence. Some people just
don’t get the message, though. If the threat of punishment doesn’t deter
someone from robbing a bank, actually spending time in prison for the
crime might do so. And if that doesn’t work, increasing the punishment
the second time might deter a third robbery. This is the logic behind
“three strikes and you’re out” laws, mandating life terms for criminals
Law 101
262
convicted of three serious crimes. Focusing on the potential repeat offender in this way is specific deterrence.
Deterrence as a basis of criminal law makes intuitive sense. If a mother
tells her children that if they don’t stop fighting she will send them to
their rooms, the threat of the punishment may be enough to deter the
kids’ conduct. Although the world at large is more complicated, the same
principle seems to hold; the threat of criminal punishment has a deterrent effect. But the effect depends on a number of factors. First, although
criminal law in general deters crime, the choices that lawmakers have are
narrower than whether or not to have a criminal law. Instead, the choices
are whether to criminalize a particular act, how severely to punish it, and
how much to invest in enforcement of the law. Then the results of those
choices—the definition of crime and the threat of punishment—must be
communicated effectively to potential criminals. Second, some criminals
and some crimes cannot easily be deterred:  psychopaths, mentally ill
persons, people acting under the heat of the moment, criminals who
think they can escape detection, and gang members who have few other
opportunities or who regard arrest and punishment as an accepted part
of their life cycle are not likely to be deterred. Third, the likelihood and
severity of punishment affect deterrence. If prostitution is criminalized
but the police regard it as a trivial offense or can’t easily track down
prostitutes and seldom arrest them, or if the police do enforce the law
but judges routinely impose only a minor fine on prostitutes, the law will
have little effect.
These issues about deterrence are empirical questions—what works
and what doesn’t. There is also an ethical question about deterrence as
a reason for having criminal law that goes to the heart of the utilitarian
approach. The utilitarian objective of criminal law is to reduce crime,
and it does so by deterring criminal behavior. But deterrence also must
accord with our nonutilitarian conceptions of justice. Suppose we are
concerned that drivers aren’t being careful enough about pedestrians.
The legislature might respond by enacting a statute requiring that drivers
yield to pedestrians in marked crosswalks. (Many states have such a
law.) But if we really want to deter drivers from being careless, we could
make the penalty for failure to yield a prison term of twenty years to life.
That’s extreme, of course. Our desire to deter has to be tempered by a
sense of proportion.
As this hypothetical suggests, even though deterrence has been the
most important utilitarian justification for criminal law, it is not the
whole story. The other important element, which has gained increasing
support in recent decades, is a retributivist approach. Retributivists argue
that retribution through the criminal law is not vengeance but justice.
Criminal Law
263
Someone has committed a wrong, and wrongs should be punished. A famous hypothetical was posed by the philosopher Immanuel Kant. Imagine
an island society that was about to disband, with all the inhabitants
departing for other places. Someone who commits a murder on the eve
of departure still ought to be punished. There is no utilitarian justification for punishment; the islanders never will see each other again, so
punishment will not prevent a future crime. But justice demands that the
society redress the wrong by punishing the murderer.
Retributivist theory requires that we know which acts are wrong. In
many cases we are confident about this; an intentional killing without
justification or excuse is always wrong. Retribution also requires us to
grade wrongs, so that a crime is punished in accordance with its severity,
and that can be more complicated. Which is worse, arson or armed robbery? Prostitution or drunk driving?
The deterrent approach to utilitarianism and the retributivist approach
interact at this point. Deterrence is a basis for criminalizing behavior to
prevent crime, but retributivist principles require deterrence that is just.
Imposing a long prison term for failing to yield to a pedestrian may
deter bad driving, but it is unjust on a retributivist basis, in that it is out
of proportion to the harm sought to be prevented. Similarly, it would
certainly deter crime if punishment were imposed not only on the criminal but also on all members of his or her family, but that would violate a basic retributivist principle. Just as criminal liability is imposed if
someone has violated the law, liability may not be imposed unless the
person to be punished has violated the law. The retributivist check on
deterrence may also enhance respect for the law and encourage lawabiding behavior; a law that is seen to be just is more likely to be obeyed
than one that is unjust.
What Is a Criminal Act?
Every criminal offense requires both a criminal act (often still referred
to by the Latin phrase actus reus) and an accompanying state of mind
(mens rea). The requirement of a criminal act is easily understood and is
contested in only a few cases, but it reflects interestingly on the purposes
of criminal law. The act element of the requirement refers to a voluntary
action of the defendant, and the criminality element refers to the harm
that ensues from the act.
An act is simply a movement of a part of the body. The criminal’s finger
pulls the trigger on the gun or her hand takes a wallet out of the victim’s
pocket. At this point we are not concerned with the consequences of the
act—the death of the victim or the value of the wallet—but only with the
Law 101
264
defendant’s physical act itself. It’s enough that there be an act and that
the defendant voluntarily performed it.
The element of voluntariness is essential. Suppose John Doe is quietly
peeling an apple when he suddenly has an epileptic seizure. During the
seizure, an involuntary muscle contraction causes his hand, which is
holding the knife he was using, to jerk out, slashing the throat of Jane
Roe, who was sitting next to him. Or suppose one night Doe gets out
of bed and, in an unconscious, sleepwalking state, picks up a knife and
slashes his wife to death. Has Doe committed a criminal act in either
case? The law says no, because Doe’s conscious mind has not directed a
voluntary act.
How does requiring a voluntary act fulfill the purposes of criminal
law? Sometimes it is argued that we can’t deter involuntary acts, so
there is no point in punishing them; the threat of a criminal sanction
cannot prevent the epileptic from having a seizure. But that’s not exactly right. We can’t prevent the somnambulist from sleepwalking, but
we can provide a disincentive for him to be in potentially dangerous
situations when he might do so; perhaps the threat of criminal punishment will encourage sleepwalkers to keep their bedroom doors locked
and keep sharp objects out of reach, or even to seek treatment for the
affliction. An even more important reason to require a voluntary act
is retributivist. Criminal punishments are exacted because the criminal
has done something wrong in a moral sense. Only where the criminal
has chosen to commit harm—that is, has acted voluntarily—is it just to
punish him.
Voluntariness as an issue arises in a few cases more common than
sleepwalking. Suppose a deeply fatigued truck driver continues to drive
at the end of a very long day, falls asleep at the wheel, and runs over
a pedestrian. Has the driver committed a criminal homicide? Running
over the pedestrian was not a voluntary act, but continuing to drive
while tired was, so the act requirement has been satisfied. The issue then
becomes the degree of homicide. The driver might argue that he should
only be liable for negligent homicide (manslaughter) because he didn’t
intend to hit the pedestrian, even though he may have been reckless in
driving in the first place.
The U.S. Supreme Court constitutionalized the doctrine of voluntariness in a pair of cases in the 1960s, Robinson v. California (1962)
and Powell v. Texas (1968). California enacted a statute making it a
criminal offense to be a narcotics addict, but in Robinson the Court
held that the statute violated the cruel and unusual punishment clause
Criminal Law
265
of the Eighth Amendment. A  state cannot constitutionally punish
someone for having the status of being an addict; addiction is an
illness, so one who suffers from it has not committed a voluntary
act. Powell suggested the limit of the principle, however. Leroy Powell
was convicted of being intoxicated in a public place and pleaded the
disease of alcoholism as a defense. This was different, the Court said.
Powell had committed an act—being drunk in a public place—so he
was not simply being punished for his status. Although he was an alcoholic, he should take measures to control the conduct that flowed
from his disease.
If the law requires an act, is failure to act enough? In a notorious incident in New York City in 1964, Kitty Genovese, a twenty-nine-year-old
woman coming home from work, was brutally attacked and murdered
over the course of a half hour; residents in nearby apartments saw or
heard parts of the attack, but most did nothing to help. Are any of them
criminally liable for failing to come to her aid? The law’s answer is no.
Traditionally two reasons are offered for this position. One reason is
practical. It’s hard to prove how much each of the bystanders contributed
to Genovese’s death; subsequent reports presented conflicting evidence
on what the bystanders saw, heard, or did. The other reason is principled
and is based on the right to be left alone from demands by the government. The government may be able to punish you for doing harm, but it
should not apply the extreme measure of a criminal sanction for affirmatively failing to do good.
There are exceptions to the rule that one is not liable for failing to
act. Most prominently, some statutes create duties to act. Failing to pay
your taxes or to stop at the scene of a traffic accident in which you
are involved may be characterized as inaction, not action, but it still is
criminal. Also, people in certain status relationships have to fulfill the
responsibilities of the relationship. A parent cannot allow his child to
starve and then defend a prosecution of criminal neglect by saying all he
did was fail to act.
The “reus” portion of “actus reus” requires that the act be of a
criminal nature. This expands the requirement beyond act and voluntariness to include harm. The law doesn’t punish all acts, only those
that are criminal in that they are wrongful and cause harm to society.
In some cases the harm is immediate and obvious; in a homicide case,
the harm is the death of a human being. In others the harm is potential rather than immediate. A driver who is intoxicated may not injure someone the first time, but the potential for harm is sufficiently
Law 101
266
great that it is useful and fair to punish the conduct before the harm
occurs.
Does Someone Have to Mean to Commit a Crime to Be Guilty?
An ancient maxim states, “An act does not make a person guilty unless
the person’s mind is guilty.” To be guilty of a crime, a person must
commit a prohibited act and must do so with a certain specified state
of mind.
Suppose, for example, that a group of hunters are in the woods
hunting on the first day of deer season. Hunter #1 (call him Cain) is
about to shoot at a deer when he sees his worst enemy, Victim #1, also
out hunting. Cain shifts his aim from the deer to Victim #1, shooting and
killing her. Meanwhile Hunter #2 (Abel) aims, fires at a deer, and misses;
his bullet travels past the deer and strikes and kills Victim #2, who was
walking in the woods near the deer but out of sight of Abel. The classic
definition of murder is “the unlawful killing of a human being with
malice aforethought.” Are Cain and Abel guilty of murder?
Cain has committed the prohibited act—the unlawful killing of another human being. (The act is unlawful because he wasn’t a police officer or soldier killing in the line of duty.) He has also satisfied the mental
element of the crime, or the mens rea, because he intended to kill his
victim. Note that the mental requirement is intention, not motive. Cain
had a motive to kill his victim—she was his worst enemy—but he would
have been just as guilty if he didn’t know the victim and had shot her
on a whim, or even if he had killed with a good motive, which is why
euthanasia can be punished as homicide.
What about Abel, who didn’t even know his victim was there? He,
too, has committed the prohibited act by unlawfully killing another
human being, but he lacks the required mental state; he didn’t act with
the intent to kill.
Think about the culpability requirement in light of the purposes of
criminal law. Requiring that someone have a “guilty mind” to be a criminal does not necessarily serve utilitarian objectives, the most important of which is deterrence. Some people argue that the law cannot and
should not deter people who didn’t mean to do anything wrong; we
cannot deter Abel, for example, from causing a result that he never intended. But that’s not quite right. Even if Abel did not mean to shoot his
victim he may have been careless, and the threat of a criminal penalty
can encourage people to be more careful. Moreover, prosecuting Abel
generally deters criminality in that the more people are prosecuted for
homicide, the fewer homicides there are likely to be.
Criminal Law
267
But it seems unjust to punish Abel when he didn’t mean to do anything wrong. A criminal conviction is a serious thing, because a stigma
attaches to labeling someone as criminal and a severe punishment is
likely to follow. We want to preserve that stigma and punishment for
situations in which the criminal has acted wrongly in a moral sense.
Even if punishing the innocent would deter crime, retributive theory
places a limit on deterrence; even if we punish the guilty for utilitarian
and retributive reasons, punishing the innocent is prohibited.
Cain meant to kill his victim, and Abel was completely blameless because he didn’t know his victim was in the area, but in many cases determining the mental state that is required to make someone a criminal is a
much more complicated thing. Definitions of criminal offenses traditionally drew on a confusing range of words describing mental states: with
malice aforethought, with intent to, willfully, maliciously, carelessly, and
so on. Many jurisdictions have followed the Model Penal Code’s attempt
to clear up this confusion by limiting the definitions of mental states to
four: purposely (sometimes called intentionally), knowingly, recklessly,
and negligently. A series of hypotheticals helps us explore the differences.
Someone acts purposely when it is their “conscious object to engage
in conduct of that nature or to cause such a result.” Cain kills his victim
purposely because that is what he wants to accomplish by firing his gun.
Suppose, though, that he sees his enemy among a group of bystanders
and opens fire with an automatic weapon, spraying the group with
bullets and killing them all. Cain has purposely killed his enemy but
only knowingly killed the others. To act knowingly means that Cain is
“practically certain” his conduct will cause a prohibited result, or that
he is aware of the nature or circumstances of his conduct. Even though it
is not his “conscious object” to kill the bystanders, since he is of normal
mental faculties he knows that some of them will be killed when he fires
on the group. There may not be much of a distinction between purposely
or knowingly, but it permits the legislature in defining crimes to punish
more severely someone who wants to accomplish a criminal act from
someone who just knows that criminal harm will follow from his act.
In our original hypothetical Abel was in a well-known hunting area
in the woods, looked around carefully before he fired, but still did not
know his victim was near the deer. Suppose instead that he saw the
victim standing near the deer and knew he wasn’t a very good shot but
fired anyway. Then he would have acted recklessly. Someone who acts
recklessly “consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk.”
He knew he might hit the victim and not the deer; because he knew he
might, he consciously disregarded the risk, but because he wasn’t practically certain that he would, he did not act knowingly. The risk of doing
Law 101
268
so was substantial because he was not a good shot and unjustifiable
because there was no compelling reason why he couldn’t have waited
to shoot.
Finally, suppose Abel didn’t see the victim standing near the deer because he rushed into the clearing and, although he should have known
that other hunters might be in the area, failed to look around before
shooting. He did not consciously disregard the risk of hitting someone
else, so he wasn’t reckless; he should have been aware of the risk, however, so he was negligent, or careless.
The four mental states are in descending order in terms of the social harm to be prevented and the moral wrongfulness of the conduct.
From the utilitarian perspective, it is more important to prevent and
punish deliberate killers rather than reckless ones and reckless killers
more than careless ones. From a retributivist perspective, someone who
means to kill is more worthy of moral condemnation than someone who
kills when disregarding the risk to others, who is in turn more blameworthy than someone who doesn’t know of the risk she is creating.
Distinguishing these mental states allows us to define which behavior is
more criminal than others and to punish more severely the more serious
behavior.
Return to Abel in the original hypothetical, in which he was not even
careless in seeing the person he shot. Most people would say Abel has
not committed a crime because he didn’t mean to do anything wrong.
Suppose that en route to his hunting trip Abel was stopped for speeding,
going 80 mph in a 65 mph zone. Abel goes to court to fight his speeding
ticket on the basis that, unknown to him, his speedometer was defective so that it read 15 mph too low. Can Abel successfully argue that he
lacked the required mental state for the crime of speeding, because he
did not act purposely, knowingly, recklessly, or carelessly?
This is an issue of statutory interpretation. What mental state did the
legislature intend to require when it enacted the traffic laws? Generally,
we would be much less offended if proof of one of the four mental states
was not required to convict someone of speeding than of some other
crime, such as homicide. Although on retributive grounds Abel may not
have done anything wrong by failing to notice that his speedometer was
broken, on utilitarian grounds it makes sense to sanction that behavior
anyway. It would be impossible for the prosecutor to prove in every case
that a traffic offender knew he was speeding, that his speedometer was
working, or that he knew or should have known it was not working.
Accordingly, we might find Abel strictly liable, or liable without being at
fault, because only a minor violation is involved and not a serious crime.
Criminal Law
269
Another form of strict criminal liability is vicarious liability, in which
one person is liable for a crime committed by another person. The
owner of a business often is vicariously liable for acts committed by her
employees in the scope of their employment. If an employee mislabels
packaged meat, sells cigarettes to a minor, or dumps toxic waste, the employer may be subject to the criminal penalty as well as the employee.
(Note that the fact that the employer is vicariously liable does not relieve
the employee of primary responsibility. As a matter of law, both employer and employee are liable, but as a practical matter, often the employer is the only one prosecuted.) Similarly, the owner of a car is liable
for any parking tickets it receives, whether she was operating the car at
the time or not. As with strict liability, vicarious liability is more often
imposed for relatively minor, regulatory offenses than for major crimes.
Can a corporation be liable for a crime? In the early common law,
the answer was no. In an old phrase, the corporation had “no soul to
damn, no body to kick,” and therefore lacking the attributes of a human
being, it could neither form criminal intent nor be punished. Over time
the courts have increasingly recognized that corporate criminal liability
is a special form of vicarious liability. Because authority is so diffused in
a large corporation, for some crimes only the corporation itself is liable,
not any individual employees, and it would be unfair to single out one
employee for an act participated in by many. Making the corporation
the criminal also provides an incentive to top management to control
the actions of their underlings, and it stigmatizes the proper entity—the
corporation on whose behalf the criminal acts were carried out.
Suppose that a defendant argues that he has made a mistake about the
state of affairs that negates one of the elements of the crime, typically
one of the mental elements. Where the effect of the mistake is that the
defendant did not have the mental state required to violate one of the
elements of the offense, the defendant has not committed the offense.
If Abel is hunting and shoots a person in a brown coat, mistakenly
thinking the person is a deer, Abel has not committed intentional homicide because he did not intend to kill a human being. Here even if his
belief is unreasonable, he has not committed a crime that requires intent
or knowledge; the only issue is his subjective mental state. However, he
may have been careless in thinking the person was a deer, in which case
he could be convicted of negligent homicide. And the reasonableness of
his belief is relevant to determining what his state of mind really was. If
Abel testifies that he thought the person wearing a bright orange coat
was a deer, the jury may well be highly skeptical of his testimony—
especially if the victim turns out to be Abel’s worst enemy.
Law 101
270
When Is Self-Defense Justified?
When someone is put on trial for a crime, the prosecution presents its
side of the case first. During the presentation of the prosecution’s case,
the defendant has a chance to poke holes in the prosecution’s case by
cross-examining the prosecution’s witnesses. Then the defendant has the
opportunity to present her own side of the story. In short, the prosecution is saying, “You did it.” The defendant can respond in one of
two ways: By saying “No” or by saying “Yes, but.” (As we will see in
Chapter 9, the defendant can be acquitted without offering any evidence
if the prosecution has failed to prove her guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt, which is a requirement of our adversary process with its presumption of innocence.)
The defendant’s “No” in response to the prosecution’s case essentially
means that the defendant didn’t commit the crime charged. “Yes, but”
responses are different. Instead of rebutting the prosecution’s claims,
the defense introduces some new factor that exonerates the defendant.
Criminal law has identified two types of “Yes, but” defenses, or reasons
that we might not want to punish someone who has satisfied the elements
of an offense: justifications and excuses.
Criminal law defines an act as criminal because it is wrong, both in
terms of moral fault and social harm. But sometimes committing a crime
doesn’t seem wrong; because of special circumstances, doing something
that otherwise would be criminal is an act that we are willing to tolerate
or even want to encourage. When this occurs, we say that the act is justified and the defendant is not guilty of a crime. Usually justifications
involve a choice among evils, and when someone chooses the lesser of
two evils, she should not be punished for doing so. Justifications include
self-defense, acting under official authority, and other circumstances that
involve a choice of evils.
At other times a criminal act is not justified, but there is still something
about the case that makes us uneasy about imposing criminal liability.
What the offender did was not the right thing to do, but some special
circumstances suggest that she couldn’t be expected to do any better.
In those circumstances the offender is excused. Excuses include mental
disorders, intoxication, and duress.
To understand when self-defense is justified, consider the story of the
“subway vigilante,” Bernhard Goetz.
On a Saturday afternoon just before Christmas four youths—Darryl
Cabey, Troy Canty, James Ramseur, and Barry Allen—boarded a
New York City subway train. The four were not sweet young boys; all
were high school dropouts with criminal records. Goetz boarded the
Criminal Law
271
train at the 14th Street Station. He was not a complete innocent, either;
he was carrying a loaded .38 caliber pistol in a waistband holster, and he
did not have a license for the gun, which he had been carrying illegally
for three years since he had been injured in a mugging. Twice before he
had successfully warded off attackers simply by displaying the gun.
Canty and Allen approached Goetz and said, “Give me five dollars.”
Neither Canty nor any of the others displayed a weapon. Goetz said that
he “knew” from the smile on Canty’s face that they wanted to “play with
me.” (All of this is from Goetz’s subsequent confession.) When Canty
asked for money again, Goetz stood up, pulled his gun, and established
“a pattern of fire” from left to right. He shot each youth in turn, aiming
for the center of their bodies. After Goetz had shot each one, he checked
on their condition. Seeing that Cabey seemed not seriously hurt, Goetz
said, “You seem to be doing all right, here’s another,” and fired another
shot that severed Cabey’s spinal cord. Goetz later said that he wanted “to
murder them, to hurt them, to make them suffer as much as possible.”
Goetz was charged with attempted murder, assault, reckless endangerment, and illegal possession of a firearm and defended on the basis
of self-defense (People v. Goetz, 1986). Let’s first consider a hypothetical
set of facts. Suppose first that one of the youths had pulled a gun out of
his pocket, pointed it at Goetz, and shouted, “I’m going to blow your
head off!” Reacting quickly, Goetz pulls out his own revolver and shoots
and kills the attacker. Goetz has satisfied all of the elements of the crime;
he has purposely killed another human being. On these facts, however,
we would say that Goetz was justified because he acted in self-defense.
It may be useful to allow people to protect themselves because it could
deter punks from assaulting subway riders. It also seems right from a
moral point of view. Goetz has a right to personal safety, and he should
be able to protect that right when it is threatened. The threat to him was
imminent and serious, and he had no reasonable alternative except to
defend himself or die. If the threatened harm had been less severe (“Give
me your money or I’ll slap you”) or less imminent (“The next time I see
you on this subway, I’ll kill you”), Goetz’s use of deadly force would not
have been justified.
The facts of Goetz’s case were much more complicated, however. The
first troubling issue in the case concerns the standard to be applied in
evaluating Goetz’s claim of self-defense. Self-defense requires that Goetz
believe that the four were going to imminently attack him and that
shooting them was necessary to prevent that. Is the issue Goetz’s belief,
or whether his belief was reasonable? Is it enough that Goetz thought he
was going to be attacked and the only way to prevent that was to fire, or
are we going to evaluate his beliefs by determining whether a reasonable
Law 101
272
person would have thought that? If the latter, then Goetz’s overreaction
would not give him a valid claim of self-defense.
The Model Penal Code applies its general principles concerning state
of mind and focuses on the actor’s subjective belief. If Goetz believed
that he was justified, then he did not purposefully attempt the unlawful
killing of the four, so he is not guilty of attempted murder. If his belief was unreasonable, he may be guilty of negligent homicide or even
reckless homicide, but he did not have the intent required for the more
serious offense of attempted murder. A  belief in the necessity of selfdefense, even an unreasonable belief, rendered Goetz less culpable.
The New York law was different, though, requiring that Goetz’s belief be reasonable. If the standard were wholly subjective, then someone
who is unusually fearful or hot-tempered might have a claim of selfdefense where an ordinary person would not. Under this view, criminal
law wants to discourage those people from acting rashly, so it holds
everyone to the same standard—the standard of the reasonable person.
Applying this view, the court upheld the indictment for attempted
murder against Goetz.
If we are going to require that someone acting in self-defense act like a
reasonable person, what characteristics does the reasonable person have?
Ordinarily we take into account some of the actor’s physical conditions
but not his mental state. A weak person reasonably may believe that he
has to use deadly force to repel the attack of a much stronger person, but
a fearful person cannot claim self-defense in every unpleasant encounter.
In the Goetz case the issues of reasonableness were very pointed. Is it
relevant that Goetz had been mugged before? Is it relevant that Goetz was
white and the four youths were black, and that many white city-dwellers
think that all tough-looking black teenagers are potential muggers? The
jury obviously thought so, because it acquitted Goetz of all charges except possession of an unregistered firearm, which was practically impossible to dispute. In the jury’s view, perhaps, those generalized factors
made Goetz’s belief understandable and even typical. But is typical reasonable? If many people are afraid of crime, should criminal law bend to
those beliefs or try to shape them? If it is typical for a white subway rider
to be afraid of black teenagers, should the law say that it is reasonable
to act on that fear?
These issues about self-defense and its racial overtones also played
out in the killing of Trayvon Martin by George Zimmerman in 2012.
Zimmerman, a neighborhood watch volunteer, called 911 in Sanford,
Florida, to report “a real suspicious guy” who “looks like he is up to no
good or he is on drugs or something.” The “guy” was Trayvon Martin,
a seventeen-year-old who had gone to a local 7-Eleven to buy a bag of
Criminal Law
273
Skittles. Zimmerman followed Martin and an altercation and struggle
ensued, during which Zimmerman shot and killed Martin. When tried
for homicide, Zimmerman pleaded self-defense, arguing that Martin
had punched him and was hammering his head to the ground; although
the prosecution disputed Zimmerman’s account, the jury concluded
that Zimmerman reasonably believed that he had to shoot Martin and
acquitted him as acting in self-defense. Even if Zimmerman started the
tragic chain of events by following Martin after the 911 dispatcher told
him not to and then approaching Martin, at the moment he used deadly
force, he met the requirements of self-defense.
Zimmerman’s case also provoked discussion about Florida’s “Stand
Your Ground” law, even though Zimmerman’s defense ultimately did not
rely on it. Under the common law, the use of deadly force in self-defense
was not available to someone who could retreat safely from a dangerous
situation, because the use of deadly force was not really necessary in
that situation. Therefore, if Zimmerman could have run away from the
altercation, he would not have been justified in shooting Martin in selfdefense. (Following the maxim that “a man’s home is his castle,” the
retreat doctrine does not apply to someone attacked in his own home.)
But Florida, like more than twenty other states, had abolished the retreat
rule to allow the use of deadly force to meet an attack even if retreat is
possible, as long as the actor is not engaged in an unlawful activity and
is in a place where he or she has a right to be.
When Are the Police Justified in Using Force?
If a police officer tackles a fleeing bank robber, can he be convicted of
an assault? Of course not. The officer’s exercise of government authority
justifies what otherwise would be a criminal act. The police are authorized to use force in the performance of their duties to serve the public interest in enforcing the law and in protecting people and property. When
the police can act and how far they can go produces enormous controversy, however.
While arresting Eric Garner for selling cigarettes without a tax stamp,
New York City police officer Daniel Pantaleo restrained him with a choke
hold that resulted in his death; while being restrained by other officers
on the sidewalk, Garner repeatedly said, “I can’t breathe.” Ferguson,
Missouri, police officer Darren Wilson approached Michael Brown
following the robbery of a convenience store, a struggle took place between Brown and Wilson, and then Brown fled; witness accounts were
in conflict about just what happened next, but in the end Wilson shot the
unarmed Brown at least six times, killing him. Garner and Brown were
Law 101
274
African American, and the incidents contributed to the spread of the
Black Lives Matter movement. These events and numerous widely reported police-involved shootings raised public visibility of the dilemma
in the justified use of force by police. We want the police to be able to
use force, even sometimes deadly force, so they can do their job, but we
also want them not to go too far and not to have their judgments about
when and how to use force affected by racial bias. How can the law help
resolve these conflicting aims?
Criminal statutes such as the Model Penal Code provide that a police officer is justified in using force when making an arrest if the officer
“believes that such force is immediately necessary.” Several requirements
are built into this type of provision. First, the justification is available to
an officer authorized to enforce the law; a private citizen who tackles a
criminal while helping an officer make an arrest also may have a justification defense, but its scope is more limited. Second, the officer must
have reasonable grounds for believing that a crime has been committed
and this person has committed it. A police officer certainly is justified in
tackling the fleeing bank robber; if the person tackled is actually a bank
customer carrying a sack of money who was frightened by the robbery
and running away, the officer’s reasonable belief still provides a justification. Third, the force must be “immediately necessary”; the officer may
be justified in shooting an armed bank robber who is spraying bullets
while fleeing the scene of the crime but not a thief who has tricked a bank
teller into giving him money and is giving herself up to the officer. Often
this requirement is qualified by focusing on whether the officer believed
that he had to use force, even if the belief was not fully supported by the
facts. Fourth, “such force” must be necessary; the amount of force must
be proportional to the need to protect the public interest that gives rise
to the justification in the first place.
The controversies about police-involved shootings especially raise
the proportionality requirement. The law allows the use of deadly force
by police but it puts special restrictions on its use. Statutes vary, but
often deadly force only is permitted if two conditions are met: First, the
crime for which the suspect is being arrested itself involved the use or
threatened use of deadly force or there is a substantial risk that the suspect will cause death or serious bodily harm if not arrested, and second,
the officer’s use of force doesn’t create a substantial risk of harm to
innocent bystanders. There is even a constitutional dimension to these
requirements; the Supreme Court has held that the Fourth Amendment
permits the use of deadly force only where the officer has probable cause
to believe that a fleeing suspect poses a threat of serious physical harm
to him or others, although the Court has been forgiving of officers’
Criminal Law
275
judgment about probable cause in some circumstances, such as when
they are engaged in high-speed car chases.
Other bodies of law in addition to criminal law are available to
evaluate police conduct. The federal government can bring criminal
charges and victims themselves can bring civil actions against the
officers and cities under the federal civil rights acts; the unlawful
killing of a suspect is a denial of life without due process performed
“under color of state law.” Or victims can bring tort actions for intentional or negligent conduct that results in physical harm. But the most
urgent focus in these cases has been on criminal law, which suggests
its unique importance. People invest great weight in the judgments
that the criminal process makes. When grand juries refused to indict
the police officers involved in the killings of Eric Garner and Michael
Brown, outrage increased because many members of the black community thought the system had failed; in one survey, two-thirds of
African Americans reported little confidence in the criminal process’s
investigations.
High-profile events demonstrate that the principles and rules of criminal law can frame our understanding of issues such as when police use
of force is justified but they cannot resolve those issues. The Model Penal
Code has an elegant and well-organized provision that defines when police use of force is justifiable, with two main sections, two subsections, six
sub-sub-sections, and two sub-sub-sub-sections. This complex provision
is used to judge the behavior of a police officer making a split-second
judgment on the street while his life may be in danger. The judgment is
based on evidence and witness testimony that often is vague and conflicting, and it is carried out by lawyers, judges, and jurors who bring
their own backgrounds, beliefs, and biases to the issue. And the criminal
law’s judgment is judged again by segments of the public with their own
understanding of the prevalence of crime, the behavior of police, and
America’s troubled history with race. The police and the courts have to
act and the people have to judge, but we ought to keep in mind the ways
in which our judgments are colored and incomplete.
In What Other Circumstances Is Someone Justified in Committing
a Crime?
Self-defense and the exercise of law enforcement authority are justified
because the actor is choosing the lesser of two evils. It’s not good to
kill someone who attacks you, but it is justified to avoid being killed
yourself. Is there a general principle of choice of evils or necessity that
justifies other kinds of conduct? The issue pushes our understanding of
Law 101
276
criminal law to the limit and is posed by one of the most famous cases in
criminal law, Regina v. Dudley and Stephens.
In July 1884, Dudley, Stephens, Brooks, and Parker, the crew of an
English yacht, were caught in a storm and forced to cast themselves
off in an open boat containing no water and no food except for two
pounds of turnips. Dudley, Stephens, and Brooks were seamen; Parker
was the cabin boy. For three days they had only the turnips to eat. On
the fourth day they caught a small turtle. They had no water except for
rainwater they caught in their raincoats. On the eighteenth day they
had been without food for seven days and without water for five, and
Dudley and Stephens proposed to Brooks that one of them—meaning
Parker—should be sacrificed to save the rest. Brooks did not agree, but
on the next day Dudley and Stephens, first offering a prayer for forgiveness, told Parker that his time had come and slit his throat. The three
sailors survived on Parker’s blood and body for four days, until they
were rescued, barely alive, by a passing ship.
When they returned to port Dudley and Stephens were put on
trial for Parker’s murder. If they had not killed and eaten Parker they
probably would have died before being rescued, and Parker, being
the weakest, was likely to have died before them anyway. In the face
of this necessity, was the murder of Parker by Dudley and Stephens
justified?
The court held that it was not. First, preservation of life is a high value
but not a supreme value:
To preserve one’s life is generally speaking a duty but it may be
the plainest and highest duty to sacrifice it. War is full of instances
in which it is a man’s duty not to live, but die. The duty, in case of
shipwreck, of a captain to his crew, of the crew to the passengers,
all these duties impose on men the moral necessity, not of the
preservation, but of the sacrifice of their lives for others, from which
in no country least of all, it is to be hoped, in England, will men ever
shrink.
And second, establishing a principle of necessity would open the
floodgates:
It is not needful to point out the awful danger of admitting the
principle which has been contended for. Who is to be the judge of
this sort of necessity? By what measure is comparative value of lives
to be measured? Is it to be strength, or intellect or what? It is plain
that the principle leaves to him who is to profit by it to determine the
Criminal Law
277
necessity which will justify him in deliberately taking another’s life to
save his own.
Is this expecting too much of Dudley and Stephens? The court thought it
was not: “We are often compelled to set up standards we cannot reach
ourselves, and to lay down rules which we could not ourselves satisfy.”
Thus even though no ordinary person would be able to resist the temptation to act as the defendants did, the law required them to resist anyway.
Some modern jurisdictions depart from the rule of Dudley and
Stephens and permit a defense of choice of evils where “the harm or
evil sought to be avoided is greater than that sought to be prevented
by the law defining the offense charged” (Model Penal Code) or where
the action is necessary to “avoid an imminent public or private injury . . . which is of such gravity that, according to ordinary standards of
intelligence and morality, the desirability and urgency of avoiding such
injury clearly outweigh the desirability of avoiding the injury sought
to be prevented by the statute defining the offense in issue” (New York
law). These standards vest the ultimate decision-making authority about
the necessity of acting and the relative weight of the evils in the court,
not the actor. Even if Dudley and Stephens believe it is necessary and
right to eat Parker, the court subsequently may reject their defense if, for
example, the court finds that the chances of rescue in time were sufficiently great, or that, as seamen, they owed a higher duty.
The choice of evils defense also arises in other circumstances. During
his first six months as an inmate in a Missouri prison, John Charles
Green was gang raped twice. When he reported the attacks to prison
officials, they told him to “fight it out, submit to the assaults, or go over
the fence.” One day at lunchtime, a group of inmates told him that they
would visit his cell that night and he would submit to them for sex or
they would kill him. At 6:00 that evening he escaped. At trial for his escape, he attempted to plead necessity but the court excluded the defense.
The majority of the appellate court also rejected the defense because he
was not avoiding imminent harm and he could have reported the threats
to the authorities, but the dissenting judge pointed out the unreality of
that choice; if he reported the incident he would be targeted for retaliation as a “snitch” and would have been “as good as dead.”
Or consider the hypothetical case of torturing a suspect to reveal the
location of a ticking time bomb and its real-world parallel in the controversy surrounding the Bush administration’s program of “enhanced
interrogation” of detainees at Guantanamo and elsewhere. Torture is a
federal crime. If waterboarding and other harsh techniques are torture,
could the agents who engaged in them be prosecuted? In an infamous
Law 101
278
memorandum in August 2002, the Justice Department’s Office of Legal
Counsel advised that torture would be justified to prevent a terrorist
attack on the United States. (The authors of the memo also creatively
argued that torture could be justified as a matter of self-defense—the
defense of the nation itself from a potential terrorist attack.) The Justice
Department subsequently withdrew the memorandum, and to date the
question has not been presented to the courts.
Cases like these raise the most challenging issues about criminal responsibility and about the purpose of the criminal law. In some cases
the law might deter, discouraging all but the most committed abortion
protestors from illegal activity. But in extreme situations, is that realistic?
Would Dudley and Stephens sacrifice their own lives and refrain from
dining on Parker for fear of criminal punishment, or because a court
had pronounced it wrong to do so? Probably not. The law seems to recognize its limits, too. Dudley and Stephens were sentenced to death, but
the sentence subsequently was commuted to six months imprisonment.
An important function of the criminal law is to declare what is right and
wrong, to develop and reinforce people’s moral fiber, and these cases
may serve this purpose more than any other.
Why Are Criminals Allowed to Plead Insanity as a Defense?
The insanity defense has been part of the criminal law for centuries,
and a classic hypothetical explains why the defense makes sense. A man
acting under an insane delusion strangles his wife, all the time thinking
that he is squeezing a lemon. How can someone who did not even understand the physical nature of his act be held criminally responsible
for it?
In recent years, though, the insanity defense has become enormously controversial as it has become more widely used in a number
of high-profile, often bizarre cases. John W. Hinckley Jr., who shot and
wounded President Ronald Reagan and three other people in an assassination attempt, was found not guilty by reason of insanity. Andrea
Yates drowned her five children, ages six months to seven years, in the
bathtub of their home, had her first conviction reversed on appeal, and
was found not guilty by reason of insanity at her retrial because she was
suffering from severe postpartum psychosis and delusions that made her
believe she was saving her children from hell. John DuPont, an eccentric multimillionaire who proclaimed that he was the Dalai Lama, Jesus,
and the last of the Romanovs, shot Dave Schultz, an Olympic wrestler
and member of DuPont’s personal Foxcatcher wrestling team, and was
found guilty but mentally ill. What should the criminal justice system do
Criminal Law
279
with people who commit horrific crimes under the influence of mental
illness?
The defendant’s mental health is relevant for several purposes. First,
someone who is mentally ill and is found to present a serious danger of
causing injury to himself or other people can be involuntarily confined
to a mental institution through a noncriminal process known as civil
commitment. A  person who has been civilly committed has not been
found guilty of a criminal act (indeed, the mental illness may involve
noncriminal behavior) and can be held only as long as his mental illness
presents a continuing danger.
Second, a criminal defendant who is mentally ill at the time of trial
may be found incompetent to stand trial. Here the issue of mental illness
is unrelated to the crime itself. Instead, the question is whether the defendant is able to understand the charges against her and to participate in her defense. It would deprive a defendant of the constitutional
right of due process of law to try her when she could not understand
what was happening or aid her attorney in presenting a defense. When
someone has been found incompetent to stand trial, the state must determine whether she probably will become competent and either provide
treatment or begin civil commitment proceedings.
Third, at the other end of the process, a defendant convicted of a capital crime may not be executed if he is mentally incompetent. Courts
have always refused to allow the execution of a person who cannot
understand that he has been convicted of a crime and sentenced to
death, and the Supreme Court has held that it would violate the Eighth
Amendment’s prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment to execute
an insane person. Various reasons have been offered for this position,
but it likely comes down to the belief that it is unfair and even inhumane
to put to death someone who cannot comprehend why it is being done
to him. This humane instinct creates an anomaly, however. The mentally
ill person on death row can be given treatment to restore his mental
competence—at which point he is killed.
The insanity defense is different from civil commitment, incompetence to stand trial, or incompetence to be executed. Insanity in criminal
law is an excuse. Someone intentionally commits an act prohibited by
a criminal statute—say, attempting to assassinate the president. He has
satisfied all of the elements of the crime: firing a gun at the president,
knowing that he is doing so, and realizing that it will likely result in the
president’s death. Nevertheless, his lawyers argue, he should not be held
criminally responsible for his act because he was mentally ill at the time
of the crime. If their argument is successful, as John Hinckley’s was, he
will not be convicted of the crime and cannot be punished, although he
Law 101
280
will be held for psychiatric evaluation and released only if he is found
not to pose a continuing danger—a process that may still keep the defendant in psychiatric confinement for many years.
Why are criminals allowed to get off because of mental illness? Think
about the purposes of criminal law and criminal punishment. A major
objective of criminal law is retribution, the moral condemnation and
punishment of those who are responsible for committing seriously
wrongful acts. The insanity defense distinguishes between those people
who are responsible for their acts and those who are not. In a well-worn
phrase, the insanity defense distinguishes “the mad from the bad, the
sick from the wicked.” Someone who commits an act that otherwise
would be criminal because he is psychologically ill does not deserve the
condemnation or punishment that criminal law usually metes out. The
offender may need to be treated or even confined if no treatment is available, but as a sick person, not as a criminal.
Criminal law also aims to deter crime and incapacitate offenders. The
mentally ill person who meets the legal definition of insanity typically
does not engage in a calculation of the consequences of his acts that can
be deterred, so the threat of a criminal sanction is useless. And because
the result of a verdict of not guilty by reason of insanity is to commit the
offender for treatment as long as he presents a danger, the offender is incapacitated and prevented from committing another crime to the extent
it is necessary to do so.
Although medical testimony at trial is necessary to establish insanity,
insanity is a legal concept, not a medical one. The issue of insanity is
whether, according to the purposes and principles of criminal law, the
defendant had a mental state that is appropriate to hold him criminally
responsible for his acts. In most cases of the insanity defense, the defendant had the mental state defined in the offense, but his mental condition was so clouded as well that we think it unwise to hold him criminally
responsible anyway. Over time, and especially since the Hinckley verdict,
the definition used to determine legal insanity has changed. The basic
question is whether we can formulate a test for insanity that satisfies
those purposes and principles and is attuned to our understanding of
mental illness and its effect on behavior.
The first great insanity case was M’Naghten’s Case, a British decision
from 1843. Daniel M’Naghten shot and killed Edward Drummond, private secretary to Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel. M’Naghten was under
the delusion that Peel was involved in a conspiracy to kill him, so he shot
the unfortunate Drummond (who was wearing Peel’s overcoat) thinking
Criminal Law
281
that he was shooting at Peel. The jury acquitted M’Naghten because of
his delusion (which today would be described as the product of paranoid
schizophrenia), and the resulting uproar matched that which followed
the Hinckley verdict. The House of Lords debated the issue and sought an
advisory opinion from the justices of the Court of Queen’s Bench. That
advisory opinion included what became known as the M’Naghten rule:
[T]o establish defense on the ground of insanity, it must clearly be
proved that, at the time of committing the act, the party accused was
laboring under such a defect of reason, from disease of the mind, as
not to know the nature and quality of the act he was doing, or if he
did know it that he did not know he was doing what was wrong.
The M’Naghten rule was widely adopted and is in effect in one form
or another in most American jurisdictions. The rule focuses on cognition: the ability to know, understand, and think about one’s actions. As a
threshold requirement, the defendant must suffer from a mental disease
or defect, although what type of disease is sufficient is seldom defined. As
a result of the disease, the defendant must fail to comprehend either the
nature of the act or that it was wrong. One can either know something
at an intellectual level or can have a deeper appreciation of it; someone
might know that killing is wrong, in the sense of being able to relate that
fact, but still lack any emotional awareness of the wrongness of killing.
Courts often fail to instruct the jury on which of these meanings is intended, although modern federal law requires that the defendant have
been “unable to appreciate” the nature of his acts.
Similarly, failing to understand the “nature and quality” of an act, or
that it is wrong, are subject to differing definitions. Usually nature and
quality is taken to refer to the physical consequences of an act—that the
defendant was strangling a person rather than squeezing a lemon and
that strangling will result in that person’s death. And wrong may mean
either that it is a legal wrong or that it is wrong in a moral sense.
The M’Naghten rule makes sense in light of the purposes of criminal
law. People who do not understand what they are doing or that it is wrong
cannot be deterred from their conduct and are therefore not morally culpable for it. But mental health professionals complain that it is based on
outmoded ideas about people’s mental processes, focusing on cognitive
defects when mental pathology often affects a person’s entire personality.
The M’Naghten rule is limited in an important respect. Suppose John
Hinckley knew that shooting Ronald Reagan would kill him, knew
Law 101
282
that it was legally and morally wrong, but heard voices in his head
commanding him to shoot, commands that Hinckley was unable to resist because of his mental illness. Under the M’Naghten rule, Hinckley
would not be excused because he appreciated the nature and wrongfulness of his act. In response to this limitation, some states supplemented
the M’Naghten rule with an irresistible impulse test. If a defendant had
a mental disease that prevented him from controlling his conduct, he
could not be deterred and was not culpable, so he should be found not
guilty by reason of insanity.
The irresistible impulse test has not been widely adopted for two
main reasons. First, it attempts to draw a line that is very hard to
draw—the line between an impulse that could not be resisted and one
that simply was not resisted. Second, we may not want to draw the line
here; providing a criminal penalty may serve an important deterrent
effect in strengthening the resolve of someone who is subject to such
impulses.
The major competitor to the M’Naghten rule has been the Model
Penal Code formulation. The Model Penal Code revises the M’Naghten
rule and the irresistible impulse test to allow broader evidence of the
effect of mental illness on conduct:
A person is not responsible for criminal conduct if at the time
of such conduct as a result of mental disease or defect he
lacks substantial capacity either to appreciate the criminality
[wrongfulness] of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the
requirements of law.
The Model Penal Code adds the irresistible impulse test’s awareness
of the importance of volition (the ability to control one’s behavior) to
M’Naghten’s emphasis on cognition (understanding one’s behavior). And
it takes a more flexible approach to the role of mental illness, allowing
an excuse where the mental illness causes the defendant to lack substantial capacity, rather than lack an entire understanding of the nature or
wrongfulness of his acts or lack any control over his impulses.
The Model Penal Code also defines “mental disease or defect” to exclude “an abnormality manifested only by repeated criminal or otherwise antisocial conduct.” Under this rule, a sociopath who suffered from
a disease that caused him to commit horrible crimes—such as a Jeffrey
Dahmer, who killed repeatedly, then refrigerated and ate the body parts
of his victims—could not be acquitted because of insanity. This provision was adopted to prevent the insanity defense from overwhelming
the concept of criminality. Could a repeat offender claim that he lacked
Criminal Law
283
substantial capacity to conform his conduct to the requirements of the
law, presenting as evidence the fact that he continued to commit crimes?
The yes or no quality of the verdict of not guilty by reason of insanity
can be troubling, so courts and legislatures have taken two steps to supplement it. One problem is that a defendant who obviously committed
a serious crime could be found not guilty by reason of insanity, temporarily held for psychiatric evaluation and treatment, and then released in
a relatively short period of time after trial. A few states have responded
with a middle-ground alternative: the verdict of guilty but mentally ill,
when the jury finds that the defendant was mentally ill at the time he
committed the offense, though not legally insane. The effect of the verdict is that the defendant is found guilty, not acquitted, so the judge can
sentence the defendant to incarceration. The statute provides, however,
that while in prison the defendant be given appropriate treatment for his
mental illness.
A different problem of the insanity defense is that it is designed only
for the most extreme kinds of mental abnormality. Many criminals have
some degree of mental illness but not to such a degree that they cannot
distinguish right from wrong or substantially control their conduct.
Should we take account of this degree of mental illness or impairment?
And if we are willing to take account of it, should we allow the presentation of expert testimony on the defendant’s mental condition not to
establish insanity but to suggest that the defendant is less responsible
for his act?
The issue has been controversial, but courts and legislatures have
attempted several solutions. First, the court can exclude evidence of the
defendant’s mental condition in the determination of guilt or innocence
and then consider it as relevant to sentencing. Where a judge has discretion in sentencing, one of the factors that might mitigate a harsh sentence
is that the defendant’s mental state at the time of the crime rendered him
less responsible than a normal person might be.
Second, the defendant’s mental condition might be considered to negate one of the required mental elements of the crime. This applies especially to mental elements that require specific intent, such as the intent to
kill for first-degree murder, but some jurisdictions apply it more broadly
to any crime. If a defendant knew he was killing someone but lacked
the mental ability to plan the crime, he would still be guilty of homicide but of a lesser degree, such as manslaughter instead of murder.
On the one hand, this diminished capacity defense allows the jury to
make more individualized culpability judgments, attuned to the degree
of responsibility in each case. On the other hand, it immerses them in a
confusing maze of psychiatric testimony. Once again, the mental health
Law 101
284
professionals have difficulty distinguishing “normal” from “abnormal”
behavior, and the jury is more likely to be confused than aided by the
testimony.
What Other Defenses Are Available?
To complete our study of defenses, consider intoxication and duress.
Being drunk is something like being temporarily insane, but can it be
used as a defense? In many cases, it can. Suppose Doc Holiday is charged
with first-degree murder for shooting Billy Clanton at the OK Corral. At
trial Doc testifies that he was present at the time of the shooting, wanted
to shoot Billy, but was so drunk that he couldn’t get his gun out of his
holster, so he did not commit the crime. If the jury believes Doc’s story,
obviously he is not guilty, because he had not committed the act prohibited by the offense (i.e., killing Billy). But suppose instead that Doc’s
defense is that he did in fact shoot Billy, but he was so drunk he didn’t
realize what he was doing. If the jury believes Doc’s story, is his intoxication still a defense?
Although some states refuse to recognize intoxication as a defense,
most states would give Doc a defense, at least to first-degree murder.
When he is too drunk to pull out his gun, his intoxication negates the
act element of the offense. When he is too drunk to know what he is
doing, his intoxication negates the mental element of the offense. Firstdegree murder requires that he have intended to kill Billy. If he does not
have that intent, he has not committed the crime, even if the reason he
does not have the intent is because he was drunk. Criminal offenses are
defined to punish offenders who deserve blame. Doc may deserve some
blame for getting drunk but not the degree of blame that is associated
with first-degree murder.
Whether Doc gets off the hook altogether depends on whether there
is some other offense available for which intoxication would not be a
defense. If Doc is charged with stealing a horse but his defense is that
he was too drunk to know that the horse on which he rode away was
someone else’s, his intoxication is a complete defense. In the case of
killing Billy, however, the intoxication may negate the intent requirement of first-degree murder, but he may still be guilty of a lesser degree
of homicide, which only requires that Doc have been reckless.
But why is this so? Recklessness requires a conscious disregard of a
substantial and unjustifiable risk—for example, wildly shooting in the
direction of a crowd is reckless. If Doc was very drunk, he may not
have been conscious of the risk he was creating. Many courts draw the
line at this point, though. Even if Doc was not aware of the risk he was
Criminal Law
285
creating by shooting, he was (or is presumed to be) aware of the risk he
was creating by getting drunk. As a matter of policy, the possibility of
criminal penalties for acts committed while intoxicated may discourage
people from drinking excessively; as a matter of fairness, it is not unreasonable to hold people responsible for the risk they incur when they
get drunk.
Next, consider duress. Suppose three men brandishing guns enter a
taxi and threaten to shoot the driver unless he drives them to a bank
they intend to rob and waits for them to aid in their getaway. The driver
has technically satisfied all of the elements of the offense of robbery: He
has committed the act by participating in the robbery, and he had the
required mental state; even though he didn’t want to take part, he did
so purposely (that is, he meant to participate). But he doesn’t seem morally responsible for the robbery. Or, put another way, it seems as if he
ought to be excused from responsibility because he was committing one
wrongful act—aiding a robbery—only to avoid a more wrongful act—
being killed by the three bank robbers.
This excuse is known as duress. Where people commit a crime only
because they reasonably believe that doing so is the only way to avoid
imminent death or serious bodily injury, they have an excuse and are not
guilty of the crime. The law recognizes that a person may be forced to
choose between two evils and it does not punish someone if he or she
chooses the lesser of the two evils. An actor is excused if he does something that is wrong, but we can understand the reasons for doing so and
forgive him for it; it wasn’t good that the driver aided the bank robbers,
but we would be hard-pressed to say he should have sacrificed his life instead. He only participated in the robbery because the robbers said they
would kill him if he didn’t, a threat they were apparently ready, willing,
and able to carry out. It would do no good to punish his action because
we couldn’t deter anyone from acting this way; any person would go
along with the robbery even if it meant criminal punishment, because
the possibility of punishment is not as bad as the imminent threat of
being killed. And what he did was wrong but not too wrong; it would be
a different case if the driver, under duress, had shot someone during the
course of the robbery.
Defenses such as insanity, intoxication, and duress have been
recognized for a long time, but the list of excuses is not closed. As our
understanding of the social, biological, and psychological factors that
influence criminal behavior expands, lawyers argue that new defenses
should be recognized.
Millionaire heiress Patty Hearst was kidnapped by the militant group
Symbionese Liberation Army; subsequently she participated with the
Law 101
286
group in a bank robbery. When she was arrested and tried, she claimed
that it was not she, Patty Hearst, who had committed the robbery, but
“Tanya,” the revolutionary she had become after being brainwashed by
her captors. Benjamin Murdock, an African American who was raised
in a low-income neighborhood, deserted by his father, and preoccupied
with unfair treatment of black people, killed two unarmed Marines
after one directed racial epithets at him; his lawyer argued the jury
should be able to consider as a defense equivalent to insanity that his
“rotten social background” gave rise to an irresistible impulse to shoot
in response to the epithets. Conversely, Ethan Couch, sixteen years old,
was speeding in his father’s truck while intoxicated and plowed into
two cars stopped on the side of a two-lane road, killing three people.
After his conviction for manslaughter, Couch’s lawyer argued he should
be sent to a cushy rehabilitation facility instead of being sent to prison
because of his “affluenza”; having been raised in a home that taught
him wealth buys privilege, he was unable to link his actions and their
consequences.
Critics deride defenses like these as a denial of personal responsibility
and the desperate tactic of creative lawyers using junk science. Advocates
argue that at least some of these defenses are legitimate, because the
criminal law’s traditional distinctions are too rigid: sane or insane, subject to immediate provocation or not. As we come to understand the
complex factors that contribute to criminal acts, they say, the law needs
to make more nuanced judgments about free will and blameworthiness.
Some of these defenses have been accepted and others have not, but the
debate is certain to continue.
Can Someone Be Convicted for Almost Committing a Crime?
Most of the time a person can be convicted of a crime only if he or she
has satisfied all of the elements of the definition of the crime. Murder,
for example, is an intentional killing. Think about the attempt on Don
Vito Corleone’s life in The Godfather. The upstart mobster Salazzo and
the Tattaglia family have two hit men shoot Don Corleone while he is
buying fruit. If the Don dies, the hit men have committed murder; but
since he doesn’t, have the hit men only committed an aggravated battery? Or can they be prosecuted for what they intended to accomplish
but failed to do—that is, for the attempted murder? Furthermore, if the
Don dies, what about Salazzo and the Tattaglias? They didn’t do the
shooting, but they were the brains and the money behind the operation.
Can they be convicted for their role—that is, for soliciting the crime or
conspiring to commit it?
Criminal Law
287
These issues involve what are known as inchoate crimes, because
the criminal acts are incomplete or imperfect. The hit men’s crime of
murder is incomplete because the Don did not die, and Salazzo and
the Tattaglias’ crime is imperfect because they did not actually pull the
trigger. Criminal law punishes three inchoate crimes: attempt, solicitation, and conspiracy.
Criminal law punishes inchoate offenses for two simple reasons. First,
people who engage in attempts, solicitations, or conspiracies are about
as dangerous as those who actually commit the crimes. The hit men who
don’t shoot accurately, the bosses who plan the hit, and the intermediaries
who hire the hit men all are about as culpable as a hit man who actually succeeds. “About” as culpable is a necessary qualification, because
there is much debate about whether someone who commits an inchoate
offense should be punished as severely as someone who finishes the job.
On the one hand, they have the same degree of moral culpability; a
gunman who shoots but has bad aim is morally as responsible as one
with better aim. On the other hand, they have not caused the same degree of harm, and the law usually doesn’t punish people just for the level
of their intent without resulting harm.
Second, establishing inchoate crimes is necessary for law enforcement.
If attempted murder was not a crime, a police officer who observed the
hit men pulling out their guns and approaching Don Corleone could not
arrest them until shots were fired. And many crimes, including so-called
victimless crimes, depend on attempt and solicitation prosecutions. The
police usually cannot prove prostitution because it is extraordinarily difficult to catch a prostitute and her customer in the act, but they can use
decoys and undercover agents to reach agreement with the prostitute or
the customer, who then may be prosecuted for solicitation.
The use of inchoate crimes as a law enforcement tool raises the central problem in this area. A person has not satisfied the elements of an
offense, such as murder or prostitution, but she has done something
else that suggests that she ought to be punished. But what exactly is
that something else? If we define the something else too narrowly, the
inchoate crimes will lose their effect. If we define it too broadly, we will
criminalize behavior that is far removed from causing harm.
Begin with the law of attempt to see how this problem works out. An
attempt in criminal law is defined much like an attempt in any other
sense of the word: Someone attempts something when he or she tries to
accomplish it. Therefore, the mental element of an attempted crime is the
intent to commit the crime. The complications arise with the act element.
Most crimes involve a chain of events, beginning with formulating the
intention to commit the crime through getting ready for it to committing
Law 101
288
the act itself. The hit men in The Godfather first agree to murder the
Don, then they stake him out for several days to find a time in his
schedule when he is most vulnerable; they obtain guns, wait outside the
fruit store, get out of their car when they see the Don coming, pull their
guns, and finally fire at him. At which of those points have they gone far
enough along to punish them for attempted murder? Suppose the police
catch wind of the plan. How long do they have to wait before they can
arrest them and get a conviction for attempted murder?
Courts and legislatures have constructed a variety of tests to determine when a would-be criminal has done enough so that a criminal
attempt has been committed. The tests illustrate something important
and ubiquitous in law. If the test is relatively clear and easy to apply, it
produces wrong results in many cases—wrong in the sense of not adequately balancing the need to prevent criminal behavior and the desire
to only punish the guilty. To balance those policies, it takes a vaguer,
more open-ended test, but any test like that becomes difficult and unpredictable to apply. Consider just one of the tests.
The Model Penal Code punishes an attempt if the defendant has
committed an act that is “a substantial step in a course of conduct
planned to culminate in his commission of the crime” if the substantial step “is strongly corroborative of the actor’s criminal purpose.” This
allows the jury to assess all the facts and determine whether the defendant in some meaningful way attempted the crime, but it requires
a highly individualized, unpredictable determination on the facts of
each case. To make things more predictable, the Code lists some actions
that constitute substantial steps, such as lying in wait for the victim or
possessing near the crime scene the tools to be used.
A second inchoate crime is solicitation. Solicitation involves trying
to get someone else to commit a crime. Like attempt, if the crime is
completed, the solicitation merges with the substantive offense. If the
Tattaglia family gets the hit men to kill Don Corleone, they may all be
liable in some way for the murder. If the hit men refuse the job, then
Tattaglia may still be liable for solicitation.
Defining solicitation presents the same problem as defining attempts.
Someone who asks or induces someone else to commit a crime is a dangerous person, and the police ought to be able to intervene and the
courts able to punish before the crime is committed. But asking someone
to commit a crime lies at some distance from the harm caused by the
crime itself, so if the standard for solicitation is too broad, we come
close to punishing someone for thinking about a crime or only engaging
in preliminary acts.
Criminal Law
289
Attempt and solicitation aim at almost-crimes, acts that are dangerous
but that have not yet culminated in a defined offense. Attempt and solicitation have their limits, though, and legislatures have responded to
those limits by creating new classes of offenses, designed to make conduct criminal even before it comes to fruition. An example is stalking.
Suppose a man is angry at his ex-wife and sits in his car outside her
house, follows her to work, and hangs around when she goes out on
dates. None of this behavior is criminal, but it might result in actions
that are; the ex-wife is afraid that he might attack her. Some legislatures
have responded by criminalizing stalking. A California statute, for example, punishes “Any person who willfully, maliciously, and repeatedly
follows or harasses another person and who makes a credible threat
with the intent to place that person in reasonable fear for his or her
safety.” Such statutes raise all the problems of inchoate crimes. How
early can we punish someone before he has committed a clearly criminal
act? If we wait too long, we may be too late to prevent the harm from
occurring; if we act too early, we may criminalize too much behavior,
including behavior that isn’t harmful.
Conspiracy is the third inchoate offense, and the one that is most
widely used by prosecutors. A conspiracy is an agreement among two
or more persons with the purpose of committing an unlawful act. The
bosses of the Tattaglia family hire the hit men and don’t themselves kill
Don Corleone, but they can be liable for the hit men’s acts because they
are all part of the same scheme. More broadly, all of the members of the
Tattaglia family might be liable as conspirators because they engage in a
broader criminal enterprise that involves gambling, drug dealing, prostitution, and general thuggery.
Conspiracy not only punishes near-crimes, like attempt and solicitation, but it also deals with the broader problem of group criminality.
A criminal group, whether the Tattaglia family or a drug cartel, is more
dangerous than just the cumulation of the crimes that its members actually commit; the group holds the potential of committing more crimes
over a longer period of time, becoming more effective at crime through
the division of labor among its members (bosses and hit men using their
respective talents, for example) and providing mutual support and encouragement for criminal activity by its members. At the same time,
conspiracy is an even more problematic inchoate crime than attempt or
solicitation. What does it mean to agree to commit a crime, and to what
extent is one of the agreeing parties liable for the acts of others? Is the
lowliest soldier in the Tattaglia family criminally responsible for all of
the acts of crime and violence committed by any member of the family?
Law 101
290
Conspiracy has been called “the darling of the prosecutor’s nursery”
precisely because of its potential breadth. The substantive law of conspiracy and the procedures at trial carry a number of advantages for the
prosecution.
First, the essence of conspiracy is agreement, so conspirators can be
convicted for acts that are much more remote from actual criminal
consequences than are required for the law of attempts. But punishing
the agreement alone is very much like punishing an intention without an
act, which criminal law never does. Most jurisdictions have responded
to this problem by requiring proof of an overt act by one co-conspirator
in furtherance of the conspiracy in addition to the agreement, but that is
not much of a burden for prosecutors, for almost any act will do.
Second, unlike other inchoate offenses, in some jurisdictions conspiracy does not merge into the completed crime. If the hit men succeed,
they can be charged with murder but not also with attempted murder.
However, if the hit succeeds, they and everyone else involved can be
charged with murder and conspiracy to commit murder and sentenced
independently for each. Conspiracy therefore has the effect of increasing
the punishment for the crime.
Third, every participant in a conspiracy is potentially liable for a
criminal act committed by any other member of the group. This dramatically expands the scope of liability of any particular participant,
which not only leads to more convictions but also allows prosecutors
to exert considerable leverage on one participant to cut a deal to testify
against others, at the risk of being liable for far-flung acts in which he
did not take part. A traditional rule imposed liability broadly: A conspirator is responsible for any reasonably foreseeable crime committed
by a co-conspirator in furtherance of the conspiracy. Today most
jurisdictions, following the Model Penal Code, apply a narrower rule,
making defendants responsible only for crimes which they solicited,
aided, or agreed to.
Fourth, a conspiracy case is different from any other crime in that
normal procedural rules are relaxed in favor of the prosecution. All the
conspirators can be tried together. This seems efficient; much of the evidence will be the same against all of them. But it also creates massive,
complex trials that disadvantage the defendants. There is the danger of
guilt by association, when evidence against one blends into an inference
of evidence of all. Defense lawyers also have a problem: If it is apparent
that a crime has been committed, it may make sense for each defendant
to try to get off by accusing the others, with the consequence that all end
up being implicated. Moreover, hearsay evidence normally is not admissible, except for an incriminating statement made by the defendant. In
Criminal Law
291
a conspiracy case, though, hearsay that ordinarily would be admissible
only against one defendant can be admitted against all the defendants.
There is one other circumstance in which someone can be liable for
a crime she didn’t commit. This is called accomplice liability, when the
accomplice doesn’t perform the criminal act but helps the criminal do so.
Accomplice liability is somewhat like conspiracy, but it focuses on the act
rather than the agreement. The driver of the car who takes the hit men to
the scene of the crime and helps them with their getaway afterward has
not killed Don Corleone, but he still is liable for the murder. On basic
principles of criminal responsibility, the driver has participated in the
act of killing with the intent that it occur. Someone who helps a criminal
conceal the crime or escape prosecution after it has been committed also
is liable as an accomplice.
What Is Homicide?
An introductory book can only define and discuss a few crimes. New
Jersey statutes, for example, define more than 200 separate offenses,
from murder to fixing a baseball game. The legislatures keep adding to
the list, making some conduct criminal in response to a particular social
problem or political demand. So we consider a few crimes that are very
important and that illustrate general issues about criminal law, starting
with the most serious crime: homicide, or the killing of a person.
Homicide is the perfect place to start not only because of the importance of the crime but also because the development of the law of homicide exemplifies the basic operating principle in the history of criminal
law: the drawing of increasingly fine distinctions between crimes and the
difficulty of doing so. Five hundred years ago English common law defined only one kind of homicide—murder—and only one punishment—
death. Since then courts and legislatures have separated many different
kinds of homicide and defined the degrees of punishment that are appropriate to each. At each step they have to distinguish more serious from
less serious crimes, based on the purposes of criminal law.
First, a preliminary matter: Homicide entails the killing of a human
being. A few cases have grappled with the question of when a human’s
life begins and ends, and the issue resurfaces in modern controversies.
The common law rule was that a fetus becomes a human being for this
purpose when it is born alive. Some legislatures also have defined late
stages of fetal development as within the definition or have enacted special statutes to deal with the killing of a fetus (subject, of course, to
the constitutional protection of a woman’s decision to have an abortion). At the other end of life, developments in medical technology have
Law 101
292
complicated the decision of whether someone near death is still alive.
Most states have adopted a definition that focuses on the death of brain
function, so that removing a respirator from a person in a severe, irreversible coma is not murder.
The proliferation of degrees of homicide proceeded in roughly the
following manner. First, manslaughter was distinguished from murder.
The traditional definition of murder, still used in many states, is the
killing of a human being with malice aforethought. The legal definition of malice aforethought is quite different from the obvious meaning
of the words and has nothing to do either with malice or forethought.
Instead, as the law developed it became a code, standing for a list of
states of mind, one of which was required to convict a defendant of
murder. Manslaughter includes every other type of homicide. Next,
murder was separated into degrees, commonly first-degree and seconddegree murder. First-degree murder basically included willful killings;
second-degree included other kinds. Finally, voluntary and involuntary
manslaughter were distinguished. Manslaughter under provocation is
the typical instance of voluntary manslaughter, and reckless or negligent
killing is involuntary manslaughter.
Let’s start with some hypotheticals based on the bombing of the Murrah
Federal Building in Oklahoma City in 1995. Timothy McVeigh, an antigovernment terrorist, was convicted of the crime. In the prosecution’s
account, McVeigh acquired the materials for a huge homemade bomb,
constructed the bomb in a rental truck, and parked the truck outside the
building on the anniversary of the tragedy in Waco, Texas, in which government agents battled the members of an antigovernment cult to which
McVeigh was sympathetic.
First take the facts as presented, and assume further that McVeigh
wanted to kill scores of government workers to make a political
statement. This exemplifies the first category of malice aforethought,
known as intent to kill. McVeigh meant to bring about the deaths of
government workers, so this is the most serious kind of homicide. Note
that we do not care about his motive—why he wanted to kill them—but
only his intention—that he wanted to kill them. If a killer acts out of a
laudable motive, he still has the intent to kill; if a man shoots his aged
wife who is suffering from a painful, terminal disease, the fact that he
only wanted to end her misery is irrelevant to the determination of his
guilt, although it may be relevant to his punishment.
Suppose that McVeigh wants to make his political statement by damaging the Murrah Building but doesn’t particularly care about killing
anyone. He parks the bomb-laden truck outside the building. When
people in the building are killed, McVeigh is still held to have acted with
Criminal Law
293
malice aforethought, under either of two theories. If he was substantially
certain that some people would die, because he knew he had constructed
a bomb that would cause a huge blast, he is just as guilty; he didn’t
necessarily want to kill anyone, but he knew it was going to happen. If
he didn’t know how strong the blast was going to be and didn’t care,
either, then he didn’t intend to kill in the sense that he knew his actions
would result in someone’s death, but he is still regarded as acting with
malice aforethought because he acted with extremely reckless disregard
for human life—what the common law colorfully called a “depraved
heart.” (Something like the same principle made homicide committed
only with the intent to commit serious bodily injury murder; it is reckless
to attempt to injure someone so severely.) This reflects the value placed
on human life, and it also shows that malice aforethought really has
nothing to do with premeditated murder.
Hypothetically, let’s go back in time to illustrate the final branch of
malice aforethought. McVeigh constructed his bomb of fertilizer, fuel
oil, and chemicals triggered by blasting caps. Suppose he obtained the
blasting caps by robbing a construction site. A  construction worker,
alarmed during the robbery, accidentally triggers a blasting cap, which
explodes, killing her. Under the ordinary rules of murder, McVeigh has
not acted with malice aforethought because he did not intend to kill
the worker and robbing a construction site does not in itself display a
reckless indifference to human life. Nevertheless, traditionally McVeigh
would be responsible for murder under the felony murder rule. A death
caused in the course of committing a felony (such as robbery) automatically becomes murder whether or not the killer intends to kill.
The felony murder rule makes a killing in the course of a felony a
strict liability crime. Even if the criminal did not intend to kill, or was
not even careless in that respect, he is still liable for murder. The principal justifications for the rule are to provide an added deterrent for
those who might commit serious crimes and to recognize the seriousness
of the consequence even in the absence of the specific intent to kill. But
the courts have been uneasy with that logic, particularly as the doctrine
was extended to less obvious cases. Suppose that McVeigh attempts to
secure the blasting caps by forging the federal license that is required to
purchase explosives. When he presents that forged license to a manufacturer, the manufacturer’s stock clerk drops the blasting caps, which
explode, killing him. Assuming it is a felony to forge the federal certificate, has McVeigh committed felony murder? This seems to go too far,
so most jurisdictions now limit the application of the felony murder rule
either to violent felonies that are dangerous to life or even a specified list
of the most serious felonies, such as rape, robbery, kidnapping, arson,
Law 101
294
and burglary. Many jurisdictions limit which killings in the course of
a felony count as felony murders; if McVeigh and an accomplice were
robbing a construction site and a police officer coming upon the crime
shot the accomplice, who was fleeing, McVeigh would not be guilty of
felony murder. And the Model Penal Code’s provision on felony murder
only creates a presumption that a killing in the course of a dangerous
felony is reckless (and therefore murder), allowing the defendant to try
to rebut the presumption.
Moving from intent to kill to substantial certainty to extreme recklessness to felony murder as a basis for including a killing within the
definition of murder expands the scope of responsibility by a process of
analogy. Acting with extreme recklessness isn’t quite the same thing as
acting with intent, but it is still pretty serious, so the courts made it punishable as murder. The next step, though, is to make distinctions among
the different kinds of murder. Are some more serious than others, and
therefore deserving of more serious punishment? In particular, should
the death penalty be imposed for all types of murder or only for some of
the most serious?
The classic formulation separated murder into first-degree and
second-degree murder, with only first-degree murderers capable of being
sentenced to death. Based on a 1794 Pennsylvania statute, first-degree
murder had to be “willful, deliberate, and premeditated”; that is, the
killer must have coolly and consciously arrived at the decision to kill.
The Pennsylvania statute suggested the kinds of murder that would fall
within the definition: “all murder which shall be perpetrated by means
of poison, or by lying in wait.” The statute also punished as first-degree
murder killings committed in the course of the most serious felonies. All
other kinds of murder are classified as second degree. Thus intentional
killings without premeditation and deliberation, extremely reckless
murder, and other forms of felony murder would be murders of the
second degree, which, historically, were not punishable by death.
Someone who kills by poison or lying in wait obviously has calculated
his act and deserves a special kind of condemnation, more so than one
who kills intentionally but without the same degree of reflection. Once
the deliberate and premeditated formula was established, however, its
limits became hard to define. A wife who wishes to poison her husband
so she can collect life insurance and marry her lover might plan the
murder for weeks by calculating the proper dosage, illegally obtaining
the poison, figuring out how to disguise its taste, and looking for an opportunity to administer the fatal potion. Suppose instead that the same
wife, who has not previously considered the scheme, is about to make
supper when she realizes she could easily do away with her husband
Criminal Law
295
by slipping some rat poison into his meatloaf. Has she deliberated and
premeditated? Most courts would say yes. Suppose she is about to place
the food on the table when she realizes she could kill her husband by
handing him the wrong plate, since her food contains an ingredient to
which he is highly allergic. Increasingly, courts have required planning
and deliberation over a period of time to find first-degree murder.
The Model Penal Code addressed the difficulty of distinguishing between first- and second-degree murder by abolishing the distinction. It
first defines murder as a killing caused purposely, knowingly, or recklessly
“under circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to the value of
human life.” It then states aggravating and mitigating factors that are to
be taken into account in determining whether the death penalty should
be imposed. The aggravating and mitigating factors address the nature of
the crime—whether it was “committed for pecuniary gain” or was “especially heinous, atrocious or cruel, manifesting exceptional depravity,”
or “was committed under circumstances which the defendant believed
to provide a moral justification or extenuation for his conduct.” They
also consider facts about the criminal, such as whether he has committed
previous crimes, his age, and his capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness
of his act. In this respect, the Code exemplifies a further extension of the
refinement of criminal categories, drawing distinctions not only among
crimes in general but also among their individual circumstances and the
persons who commit them.
The next level of distinction among criminal homicides is between
murder and manslaughter. Some killings are severe enough to merit punishment but not so severe that they deserve to be classified as murder.
These are killings without malice aforethought. As we saw, that phrase
is a catchall for various types of extremely bad acts, and manslaughter,
too, comprises a number of different types of killings. And within manslaughter there is a further distinction between voluntary and involuntary manslaughter.
The major type of killing falling within voluntary manslaughter is
killing under the heat of passion caused by a sufficient provocation—
killing in hot blood, rather than the cold blood required for murder. One
of the classic illustrations of voluntary manslaughter is the man who
comes home, finds his wife in bed with another man, and, in a jealous
rage, shoots the paramour. Traditional judges understood how the husband could be so shocked by his wife’s infidelity or inflamed by the
affront to his dignity that he lost control; though killing the paramour
is not a praiseworthy act, it is at least understandable and so constitutes
a lesser degree of criminality than murder, even though there was an intent to kill.
Law 101
296
Essentially, allowing provocation to reduce a crime from murder to
manslaughter recognizes human frailty; under extreme circumstances,
people simply cannot be expected to conform their conduct to the
requirements of the law. Once we start down this path, though, many
killings might be excused, so criminal law recognizes only reasonable
provocation. Once again we see the conflict between attending to individual circumstances and making rules that cover classes of cases. At
common law, the courts tended to develop categories of provocation
that were reasonable. The husband who discovers his wife’s infidelity
was a classic instance. Other groups included people engaged in a fight
and the victim of a serious assault. Traditionally, “mere words” did not
constitute a reasonable provocation; someone insulted, threatened, or
told by his wife of her infidelity could not kill in response, for example.
More recently there has been a tendency to individualize the inquiry; the
Model Penal Code permits murder to be reduced to manslaughter if the
defendant killed under an “extreme emotional disturbance” caused by a
“reasonable explanation or excuse.”
Involuntary manslaughter is the final category of homicide. Malice
aforethought for murder can be satisfied by extreme reckless indifference to the risk created to human life—such as driving a car wildly
onto a crowded sidewalk. In tort law, civil liability is imposed for ordinary negligence or carelessness—causing an accident by eating your
Egg McMuffin on the way to work and not paying sufficient attention
to the road. Somewhere in between extreme recklessness and ordinary
negligence lies another type of recklessness and criminal negligence,
and this gives rise to involuntary manslaughter. The issue is particularly controversial in cases involving car accidents that result in death.
Historically courts and juries were reluctant to convict reckless drivers
of murder, perhaps under the instinct that “there but for the grace of
God go I,” so legislatures created a crime of vehicular homicide, either
as a free-standing offense or a variety of involuntary manslaughter. The
recent activism against drunk driving has increased the willingness to
criminalize drunk driving, as involuntary manslaughter or even seconddegree murder.
Why Is Rape Law So Controversial?
Rape has been one of the most highly publicized and controversial areas
of criminal law in recent years and an area that has seen the greatest
transformation. High-profile cases capture the media’s and the public’s
attention. How are men, women, and criminal law to cope with changing
Criminal Law
297
patterns and perceptions of sexual behavior and gender roles? Does
“no” always mean “no”? Is sex without overtly expressed consent rape?
The law on rape has many dimensions, from the elements of the crime
to the kind of proof admissible at trial, and every element has been in a
state of flux. As with any other legal issue, the decision in a particular
case often turns on the precise wording of a statute or the authority in
the jurisdiction. Keep that in mind as we examine here more general
questions about where the law has been, where it is now, and where it
might be going.
We begin with an extremely controversial Pennsylvania case from
1994, Commonwealth v. Berkowitz. The complainant, a female college
student, left her class, went to her dormitory room where she drank a
martini, and then went to a lounge to await her boyfriend. When her
boyfriend failed to appear, she went to another dormitory to find a
friend, Earl Hassel. She knocked on the door but received no answer.
She tried the doorknob and, finding it unlocked, entered the room and
discovered a man lying on the bed. The complainant at first thought
the man was Hassel, but it turned out to be Hassel’s roommate, Robert
Berkowitz. Berkowitz asked her to stay for a while and she agreed because she “had time to kill.” He suggested that she sit on the bed, but she
declined and sat on the floor.
Berkowitz then moved to the floor beside her, lifted up her shirt and
bra and fondled her breasts. He then unfastened his pants and unsuccessfully attempted to put his penis in her mouth. Berkowitz locked the
door and pushed her onto the bed, and the complainant described this as,
“He put me down on the bed. . . . He didn’t throw me on the bed. . . . It
was kind of like a push but not.” Then he removed her sweatpants and
pulled her underpants off one leg. Berkowitz did not restrain her in any
way, other than lying on top of her, nor did he threaten her. Berkowitz
then penetrated her vagina with his penis. The complainant said “no”
throughout the encounter. After withdrawing and ejaculating on her
stomach, he stated, “Wow, I guess we just got carried away,” to which
she responded, “No, we didn’t get carried away, you got carried away.”
Rape? The Pennsylvania Supreme Court, following the traditional
law, said no. The Pennsylvania rape statute made it a crime for a man
to engage in sexual intercourse with a woman other than his spouse
“by forcible compulsion.” In the court’s view, the complainant’s testimony did not establish the use of force or the threat of force. Berkowitz
had not knocked her down or physically restrained her. Saying “no”
throughout the incident may show lack of consent, but it does not show
that Berkowitz used force.
Law 101
298
In a similar case, State in the Interest of M.T.S. (1992), the New Jersey
Supreme Court disagreed. Fifteen-year-old C.G. lived in a townhouse
with her mother, her siblings, and several other people, including M.T.S.
(Initials are often used in cases involving juveniles to avoid identifying
the parties.) Each disputed exactly what had happened, but the trial
court concluded that early one morning C.G. had consented to kissing
and heavy petting with M.T.S. but had not consented to intercourse and,
when M.T.S. thrust his penis into her vagina, she pulled him off of her
and said “Stop, get off.” The key issue for the New Jersey court was consent, not force. Without “affirmative and freely given permission,” the
act of unconsented sexual penetration itself satisfies the requirement of
physical force. Permission does not have to be verbal or announced, but
the evidence must be sufficient to demonstrate to the reasonable person
that consent has been given.
How do we explain the difference between the two results? The
wording of the Pennsylvania and New Jersey statutes differed, but not
so significantly that it should have made such a difference in the result.
One way of understanding the difference is that the Pennsylvania court
applied a traditional conception of the crime of rape and the New Jersey
court applied a more modern one.
The traditional conception of rape requires force or the threat of force
in its commission. The definition of rape as forcible even gave rise to a
requirement that the victim had to resist her attacker “to the utmost.”
The resistance requirement did not apply, however, where resistance
would be obviously futile in the face of an overwhelming threat. If the
rapist holds a gun to the victim’s head, she is not required to resist.
The resistance rule reflects traditional perceptions about men, women,
and sexual behavior, and as perceptions have changed, the law has changed
too. Everyone understands what legal scholar Susan Estrich labeled “real
rape”: “A stranger puts a gun to the head of his victim, threatens to kill
or beat her, and then engages in intercourse.” But most rape cases differ
in some respect from this model, as Estrich explains: “Where less force
is used or no other physical injury is inflicted, where threats are inarticulate, where the two know each other, where the setting is not an alley
but a bedroom, where the initial contact is not a kidnapping but a date,
where the woman says no but does not fight.” In those cases the decision
about whether what has happened deserves to be called rape depends on
one’s perceptions. The traditional law is motivated by perceptions such
as men are sexually aggressive and women are passive, women have
a responsibility to avoid stimulating men or creating compromising
situations if they do not wish to have intercourse, a woman’s resistance
to a man’s sexual overtures is part of the routine of sexual behavior, and
Criminal Law
299
“no” doesn’t always mean “no.” The modern law is motivated more by
the perception that a woman has a right to personal autonomy, and a
man has the responsibility to be sure that a woman consents to a sexual
encounter. (Traditionally rape could only be committed by a man against
a woman, but some recent statutes are gender neutral, protecting men
from forcible sexual assault, too.)
Under the modern approach, many states have abolished the resistance rule and redefined the definition of rape. Some require both force
and the absence of consent, and others specify that the essential element
of the crime is either force, the absence of consent compelled by force,
or the absence of consent alone. The exact terms of the statutes matter,
but the persistence of traditional perceptions of gender norms and
sexual conduct matter too. The M.T.S. case changed New Jersey law to
focus on consent rather than force, and other states have done the same.
Despite the change in the law, even in those states police, prosecutors,
judges, and juries are more likely to look for force and even resistance
as evidence of rape.
Sometimes there is consent to sexual relations but the law concludes
that the consent is ineffective so the perpetrator is still guilty of rape.
(Often statutes define degrees of sexual assault and these offenses may
be lesser crimes than forcible rape.) A high school principal threatens a
student that he will prevent her from graduating unless she submits to
intercourse with him; under the traditional law, the absence of force or
threat of physical harm prevents this from being rape, but the Model
Penal Code criminalizes the principal’s conduct as achieved by coercion.
A man slips a date-rape drug into a woman’s drink and has intercourse
with her, or a man’s date becomes so intoxicated that she can’t think
clearly or communicate resistance and they engage in sex; the first case
obviously is more blameworthy, but many states declare the second to
be criminal misconduct as well. A person who has a mental disability
that renders her incapable of understanding the nature and risks of
sexual relations cannot effectively consent. The law also provides special
protections for minors by limiting the effectiveness of their consent. The
statutes vary, specifying different ages of consent or taking account of
the age difference between the defendant and the victim. If an adult man
believes the woman with whom he has intercourse is eighteen when she
is actually only fourteen, has he violated the statute? Traditionally the
rule was yes. Statutory rape laws were strict liability offenses enacted to
protect innocent girls who were not mature enough to consent to sex,
and a mistake about the girl’s age was not a valid defense. More recently
a number of jurisdictions have changed the law to allow a defense of
reasonable mistake.
Law 101
300
The different perceptions of sexual behavior have also colored evidentiary issues in rape cases. The traditional conception was suspicious of
rape complaints and reflected that suspicion in three rules that made the
prosecution of such complaints more difficult. First was the fresh complaint rule, which required that the victim had to report a rape promptly
after its occurrence. Second was the corroboration rule, which required
that the defendant could not be convicted solely on the uncorroborated
testimony of the victim. Third was the admissibility of evidence of the
victim’s prior sexual history. These rules reflect antiquated attitudes and
have been abolished in many jurisdictions.
9
Protecting the Innocent, Freeing
the Guilty
Criminal Procedure
You may know more about criminal procedure and the criminal justice
system than any other branch of the law. News reports of notorious
trials and police dramas bring the criminal process into the American
living room every night. Even small children can recite a Miranda
warning, hardly knowing that they are paraphrasing a U.S. Supreme
Court opinion: “You have the right to remain silent. Anything you say
can and will be used against you in a court of law.”
Criminal procedure has become the most-discussed area of the law,
and it also is one of the most important. Half of the rights enumerated
in the Bill of Rights are directed at the criminal process because it is the
area in which the greatest power of the state can be brought to bear: the
power to take a person’s liberty or even life. This chapter explores that
process and comes to grips with how that power is regulated.
What Is Criminal Procedure?
Criminal procedure, also called the criminal process or the criminal justice system, is the mechanism through which crimes are investigated,
the guilt of criminals adjudicated, and punishment imposed. It includes
the police, prosecutors, defense attorneys, and courts; the practices and
procedures observed by them; and the legal rules that ostensibly govern
them. In the criminal process an individual is pitted against the government, with all of its resources and authority, and only through the
criminal process can the state’s most serious sanctions—imprisonment
or even death—be applied.
Criminal law, discussed in the previous chapter, defines what conduct is criminal and prescribes the punishment for criminal conduct.
Criminal procedure makes the criminal law work; the sanctions defined
Law 101
302
by criminal law are effective only because the criminal process can bring
the sanctions to bear on individuals who violate the law. At the same
time, criminal procedure aims to make sure that criminal sanctions are
applied only to those who are guilty and only through procedures that
are recognized as fair. One goal of the criminal process is to punish the
guilty, but other goals are to protect the innocent and to ensure that even
the guilty are protected from abuse by the government.
Although we talk about “the” criminal process, different systems are
in place in each state and in the federal courts. Each system is controlled
by several overlapping bodies of law. Most states have enacted comprehensive codes of criminal procedure that structure the process from
arrest through appeal. To supplement these codes, the state supreme
courts often exercise their authority to adopt rules of criminal procedure that further specify how the criminal process is to be conducted.
Similarly, criminal cases in the federal courts are conducted in accordance with statutory requirements set by Congress and the Federal Rules
of Criminal Procedure adopted by the U.S. Supreme Court.
In a most important respect, however, all state and federal criminal justice systems are alike: They all are required to adhere to the requirements
of the federal Constitution. The federal courts have always been subject
to constitutional requirements, of course, but especially since the 1960s
the law of criminal procedure has been constitutionalized. This criminal
procedure revolution involved two steps: The Supreme Court applied
the due process guarantees of the Bill of Rights to the states and, in the
process, interpreted those guarantees in a more expansive manner than
it had done previously.
The Supreme Court originally had held that the Bill of Rights was a
restriction on the powers of the federal government, not the states. The
Reconstruction Amendments, particularly the Fourteenth Amendment,
radically changed the situation. In addition to granting citizenship and
equal rights to former slaves, the Fourteenth Amendment expressly prohibited “any state” from depriving “any person of life, liberty, or property,
without due process of law” or “the equal protection of the laws.” The
task that then faced the Court was to determine which of the protections
of the Bill of Rights were included within these vague commands. Over
time, the Court settled on a standard of selective incorporation. The
Fourteenth Amendment did not incorporate all of the guarantees of the
Bill of Rights; it selectively incorporated those protections that are “necessary to an Anglo-American regime of ordered liberty.” The fact that a
protection is included in the Bill of Rights is strong evidence that it has
that status. In fact, selective incorporation has not been all that selective.
Virtually all of the protections in the Bill of Rights have been held to be
Criminal Procedure
303
fundamental under this standard, with the notable exception of the right
to indictment by a grand jury.
Applying the Bill of Rights guarantees to the states would not be particularly significant unless those guarantees had broad meaning. In Boyd
v.  United States (1886) the Court recognized its obligation to “liberally construe” constitutional protections such as the Fourth and Fifth
Amendments in order to ensure “the security of person and property.”
The movement beyond a narrow interpretation of criminal procedure
rights gained strength in the 1920s and accelerated rapidly in the 1960s.
State constitutions have also played an increasingly important role
in criminal procedure. State courts often interpret their constitutions to
provide more extensive rights for citizens and criminal defendants than
are guaranteed by the federal Constitution.
Criminal procedure codes and constitutional law make up only one
dimension of the criminal justice process, however. The actions of the
participants and the culture of the local system are crucial in determining how the process will actually work. Who is selected to be a police
officer? How does the officer act during a traffic stop, when called to a
domestic dispute, or when interacting with drug dealers, teenagers, and
persons being interrogated? Does the officer’s behavior differ if a potential offender is black or white? What are prosecutors’ practices about
charging minor offenses, bail, and plea bargaining? Who are the judges
and what are their backgrounds? How well-funded and aggressive is the
public defender’s office? The answers to questions like these tell us at
least as much about how the system works as does the latest Supreme
Court decision. The law of criminal procedure is designed to regulate
the behavior of these actors, but there are limits to the law’s ability to
control conduct.
Why Do We Need Criminal Procedure?
Suppose that we had statutes that proclaimed certain conduct to be
criminal but no police, prosecutors, or courts to implement the statutes.
If criminals were not afraid of being caught and prosecuted, it would
hardly deter them from committing crimes, and it would send a powerful message that, as a society, we were not serious about punishing
wrongdoers.
Suppose, by contrast, that we were determined to crack down on
crime. We could establish a criminal process that would go as far as possible in investigating crimes and punishing criminals. The police could
wiretap everyone’s phone, stop and search anyone walking down the
street who looked suspicious, come into any home or office without
Law 101
304
knocking, and beat confessions out of suspects. In court, the defendant
would not be allowed a lawyer, only the prosecutor could present a case,
and a judge could convict the defendant on flimsy evidence.
Obviously, neither of these situations would be tolerable. We need
a criminal process to investigate and apprehend people who may have
committed crimes and to adjudicate their guilt or innocence in order to
control crime, but the process has to be consistent with our values and
traditions as a free society. This conflict of objectives produces great
controversy about the content of the law. How far should we allow the
police, prosecutors, and courts to go? To think about that question, we
need to spell out in more detail the conflicting values inherent in criminal
procedure.
A first value of criminal procedure is truth-seeking. The criminal process should identify, apprehend, and punish persons who have committed
crimes, but it also should exonerate those who have not committed
crimes. Truth-seeking is an important value at every stage of the criminal
process. It certainly is important in the final determination of guilt or innocence at trial, but it also applies at earlier stages of the process. Police
need to make accurate determinations of when there is sufficient reason
to investigate a crime or arrest a particular person, and prosecutors need
to decide correctly when charges should be brought against someone.
The system also needs to seek the truth efficiently. We want the system
to work reasonably well in implementing the criminal law, given that
resources are limited and mistakes inevitable. Because resources are
limited, we cannot have a perfect system, but the police have to solve
a reasonable number of crimes and the courts cannot make too many
mistakes in convicting those who are brought to trial.
A focus on efficiency might suggest that police, prosecutors, and
courts are pretty good at separating the innocent from the guilty. It
would make sense, therefore, to let the agents of the process do their job
through procedures that are informal and routine. Police, for example,
should not be burdened with cumbersome procedures or hypertechnical
requirements about what they must do in investigating crimes, seizing
evidence, or interrogating suspects, burdens that would only diminish
the system’s ability to determine the truth.
But the system must not be too efficient. Truth-seeking is an imperfect process, and efficient truth-seeking can be a dangerous process.
Resources are limited, and limited resources for police, investigators,
lawyers, and judges means that mistakes will be made. Indeed, even the
best-designed and most fully funded system will produce mistakes. The
people operating the system are just people, and people have prejudices
and can exhibit bad judgment. If mistakes are to be made, therefore, they
Criminal Procedure
305
should be made in the direction of making sure that an innocent person
is not convicted, which necessarily means that some guilty persons will
be set free, too.
From this perspective, informal, routine procedures are particularly
dangerous. Police, prosecutors, and criminal court judges see a lot of
crime, so they tend to see crime everywhere. We need rules to control
their conduct, judges to carefully apply those rules, and other judges to
review those decisions. This perspective leads us to value an adversarial
system, with substantial legal protections that can be applied to correct
errors and abuses, even if those protections lead to the release of persons
who actually have committed crimes.
This conflict is not only about truth-seeking and efficiency. In the
criminal justice system, the government brings its power to bear against
an individual. But people are not simply problems of crime control to be
dealt with by bureaucratic procedures. The dignity and the status of the
individual are essential values of criminal procedure. A criminal sanction
can be imposed only after a process that respects that dignity and status,
even if the process is slow, cumbersome, and likely to err on the side of
the individual.
To limit mistaken convictions and to respect the dignity of the individual we have a presumption of innocence. It may be factually true
that someone who has been investigated and arrested by the police and
charged by the prosecutor is probably guilty, but that probability is legally irrelevant. Just the opposite; all through the process, up to the
moment of conviction, the accused is presumed to be legally innocent.
The state must meet a heavy burden to overcome this presumption, and
it must follow all the rules in doing so.
The adversary process and presumption of innocence serve another
purpose. We are justifiably afraid of the wrongful exercise of the great
government power in the criminal process, and there is a particular concern that the power will be applied unequally. Police, prosecutors, and
courts have a great deal of discretion in how they exercise their power,
and American history is full of incidents in which the power has been
exercised to the disadvantage of the poor, minorities, or other unpopular
groups.
How do we balance these conflicting objectives in criminal procedure?
Do we want the process to look more like an assembly line or an obstacle course? The conflict between these objectives generates all of the
arguments about what kind of criminal procedure we should have, just
as it generates the body of law we do have. There is widespread agreement among participants in the system and scholars of criminal procedure that things are a mess. The conflict has created a body of law that
Law 101
306
is inconsistent and unpredictable. In this chapter, as you think about
what the rules should be, consider as well whether, given the conflicting
objectives of the criminal process, it is possible to have clear rules at all.
What Are the Steps in the Criminal Process?
Before exploring the details of criminal procedure, let’s look at a quick
overview of the steps of the process. The process works differently in
different states and the federal system, and not every case proceeds
through the system in the same way, but this description is a good approximation of the path of a typical case.
The criminal process begins, of course, with a crime, or, more accurately, the suspicion of a crime by the authorities. A 7-Eleven convenience
store is robbed, and either a police officer witnesses the crime or, more
commonly, the victim (here the owner) reports the crime to the police.
The first step is for the police to investigate the crime: interview potential
witnesses, look at video from the security camera, collect other evidence
from the crime scene, and compare this crime to similar incidents. The
investigation may focus suspicion on an individual—call him Buggsy—
and the police might question him. They might stop him on the street, or
go to his home, and temporarily detain him to conduct the questioning.
If the 7-Eleven was held up by an armed robber, or if they have other
reasons to suspect Buggsy might have a gun, the police might frisk
him—pat down his clothing to make sure he is not concealing a weapon
that could immediately endanger them. These kinds of encounters with
the police can be annoying, intrusive, or even harassing, but they are
permitted as steps short of arrest or taking someone into custody.
In other types of cases the investigation may be more complex. In
a homicide, for example, the scientific investigation of the crime scene
may be more extensive, and an autopsy will be performed on the
victim. Informants, wiretaps, and even sting operations may be used in
investigating more complex criminal enterprises.
From this point on, several screens are applied to determine whether
Buggsy will be formally brought into the criminal process and, once he
is in it, whether he will be able to get out. (As long as Buggsy remains in
the system, the investigation of the crime may be ongoing; the police and
prosecutors may gather further evidence to be used against him at trial.)
Once the investigating officer is satisfied that there is probable cause
to believe that Buggsy held up the 7-Eleven, he will arrest him. Buggsy
will be taken into custody (except in the case of very minor offenses)
and booked by having his name and other information recorded, being
fingerprinted and photographed, searched, and locked up (again, except
Criminal Procedure
307
for certain minor offenses, for which he will be released and told to
appear before a judge at a certain time).
The next step is to determine whether to formally charge Buggsy with
a crime, and, if so, which crime. Charging is normally done through the
filing of a complaint, a document that sets forth what offense Buggsy has
been charged with and the facts underlying the charge. The charging decision is typically made by a higher-ranking police officer, a prosecutor,
or both. The person making the charging decision might decide not to
charge Buggsy or to charge him with a different crime for a number
of reasons. She might decide that the matter can be better handled in
another way; if Buggsy is a kid who has stolen a candy bar from the 7-
Eleven, for example, the police may release him to his parents with only
a stern lecture. Or she might decide that the arresting officer’s determination of the charges was incorrect; depending on what kind of weapon
Buggsy had and how much he stole, the charges might be increased or
reduced accordingly.
After Buggsy is charged, his status changes from arrestee to defendant,
and the focus shifts from the police station to the court system. Shortly
after the charge is filed, the defendant is brought before a judge (often a
lower-level magistrate) for an initial appearance. Most jurisdictions impose a time limit on how long a defendant can be held (often 24 hours)
before being brought before a judge. At the first appearance, the judge
will inform Buggsy of the charges against him and will advise him of his
basic rights, such as the right to remain silent and the right to counsel. If
Buggsy is indigent, the judge will take steps to have a free attorney provided for him; the Supreme Court has interpreted the Sixth Amendment
to the Constitution to require the appointment of counsel for an indigent
defendant at critical stages of the proceedings, from interrogation and
pretrial through an appeal. The judge will also set bail. The amount set
will depend on the seriousness of the crime, Buggsy’s background, and
the perceived risk that he will fail to appear for trial. If the defendant
cannot make bail, he remains in jail awaiting trial. In many cases, the
judge will release the defendant on his own recognizance, not requiring
any bail at all.
Following the initial appearance, a defendant in a felony case may
be entitled to a preliminary hearing. In misdemeanors (minor crimes)
the preliminary hearing and some other intermediate steps usually are
not necessary. The preliminary hearing is the first independent review
of the charges by a judge, who must determine whether probable cause
exists that the defendant committed the crime charged. The prosecutor presents witnesses to establish the basic elements of its case, and
Buggsy’s defense attorney can cross-examine those witnesses and even
Law 101
308
present defense witnesses, although for tactical reasons that opportunity
is seldom taken. If the judge determines that there is sufficient cause to
hold the defendant, the case proceeds; if not, the case may be dismissed,
unless the prosecutor is able to file reduced charges that are supported
by the evidence.
The traditional means of giving further review to felony charges is
by the grand jury, which decides whether there is sufficient evidence
to indict the defendant. The prosecutor can also use the grand jury as
an investigatory body before bringing charges. The grand jury, like the
trial (or petit) jury, brings laypeople into the criminal process as decision makers. The grand jury proceeding is secret, and only the prosecutor presents evidence. Witnesses brought before the grand jury are not
allowed to be assisted by counsel during their testimony. Accordingly,
the grand jury’s historic function of reviewing the prosecutor’s case and
screening out unsupported cases has significantly declined. As the saying
goes, a competent prosecutor can persuade a grand jury to indict a ham
sandwich. In many jurisdictions, there is no longer a requirement that
the grand jury review the charges.
If the grand jury has indicted, the indictment is filed with the court.
Where grand jury review has not occurred, the prosecutor files a comparable document known as an information. Like the complaint, the indictment or information lays out the charges against the defendant and
the factual basis for them. Buggsy is brought back to court and arraigned
on the indictment or information. At the arraignment, he is again informed of the charges and asked to plead either guilty or not guilty. Here
(or sometimes earlier, sometimes later) plea bargaining enters the picture; Buggsy may decide to plead guilty in exchange for reduced charges
or favorable sentencing.
A defendant who pleads not guilty looks ahead to the trial. Before
the trial, however, the defense attorney may make a series of procedural or substantive motions to the court. Typical procedural motions
will challenge some defect in the charging process. The most important
substantive motions concern discovery of the prosecution’s case and
suppression of evidence. Buggsy has a right to know what evidence, favorable and unfavorable, the prosecutor has against him prior to trial,
so that a defense can be better prepared. If there were defects in the process of collecting evidence, such as an interrogation of Buggsy without
adequate warning of his constitutional rights, the defense can make a
motion to have the evidence excluded from the trial.
The formal centerpiece of the criminal process is the trial. The defendant has a right to a jury trial in felonies and in serious misdemeanors,
although the right can be waived so the case will be tried to a judge
Criminal Procedure
309
(called a bench trial). If the defendant is acquitted, the case is over. If he
is convicted, the judge or jury, as directed by statute, will determine the
sentence—the punishment that is to be applied.
The trial is hardly the end of the story. The defendant has a right
to appeal, to ask a higher court to review the trial for errors. (If the
defendant is acquitted, the prosecution cannot appeal, because of the
constitutional prohibition on double jeopardy, or being tried twice for
the same crime.) If errors are found, the defendant may be entitled to a
new trial. Even after the normal appeals are concluded, the convicted
defendant can pursue collateral postconviction remedies. Sometimes the
defendant will petition a federal court, alleging some constitutional error
in the trial, even if the trial initially was in state court.
When Can the Police Conduct a Search and Seizure?
The law of search and seizure governs some of the most basic police
investigative techniques, including wiretapping and other electronic surveillance, examination of business records, and going through people’s
trash, in addition to more traditional techniques such as stopping
suspected criminals and searching their clothes, cars, or other belongings. If criminal procedure was focused entirely on finding the truth and
solving crimes, the police would be given wide latitude to engage in
searches and seizures. But giving them that latitude would infringe on
people’s rights of property, privacy, and personal security. Therefore, the
police’s ability to engage in these activities is regulated by the Fourth
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution:
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers,
and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not
be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause,
supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the
place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
The Fourth Amendment applies to searches and seizures conducted
by any government official, not just a police officer. A  public school
principal who wants to search a student’s locker or a Food and Drug
Administration meat inspector who wants to inspect a packing plant
has to abide by the Fourth Amendment, although the standards of what
constitutes an unreasonable search are different in those contexts than
with a police officer stopping someone on the street. Conversely, the
constitutional safeguards only protect against actions by government
officials. A private employer who wants to monitor employees’ email or
Law 101
310
a department store that installs security cameras in its dressing rooms is
not subject to constitutional restrictions. (In some cases, statutes or the
common law right of privacy provide some protection.)
Although the Fourth Amendment applies to all government activities, how it applies is less clear in cases of investigations involving national security. A  series of statutes have expanded the government’s
investigatory powers beyond what is permitted in ordinary criminal
investigations. Under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA),
for example, federal agents can apply to a special court that meets in secret to approve wiretaps, search warrants, and other investigative tools.
The USA PATRIOT Act, enacted in the wake of the September 11 attacks
and amended since then, introduced new measures such as sneak and
peek warrants, under which agents conduct a search without notifying
the subject of the search and have the power to demand library and
bookstore records in the course of an investigation without notice to the
person being investigated. As was revealed by massive leaks of National
Security Agency data in 2013, the FISA court authorized the NSA to
collect information on millions of telephone calls and emails without
obtaining warrants, an extension of authority that was limited by the
USA Freedom Act in 2015. The rest of the discussion of search and seizure law in this section only concerns traditional criminal prosecutions.
(For more on the constitutionality of government actions taken in the
war on terror, see Chapter 2.)
The first question in this area of law is: What is a search or a seizure?
Let’s focus on searches first. Is it a search if a police officer peers inside
your car to look for drug paraphernalia? If she goes through your garbage? Has a trained dog sniff your luggage? Taps your telephone to hear
if you talk about drugs? The question of what is a search is an important one because the Fourth Amendment provides protection only when
there has been a search or seizure. If it is a search, then the court goes
on to determine whether the amendment’s other requirements have been
satisfied.
Originally the Supreme Court held that only a physical intrusion
into one of the areas enumerated in the Fourth Amendment—persons,
houses, papers, and effects—counted as a search. In Katz v. United States
(1967), the Court broadened the scope of protection to encompass a
justified expectation of privacy with respect to the scope and manner of
the search, without the necessity of a physical intrusion of a particular
kind. Today the Court uses both approaches. In two majority opinions
Justice Scalia held that physical invasion of property—by installing a
GPS tracking device on a suspect’s car (United States v. Jones, 2012) and
bringing a drug-sniffing dog onto the porch of a suspect’s house (Florida
Criminal Procedure
311
v. Jardines, 2013)—violated the Fourth Amendment; in each case other
justices concurred in the result but argued a violation of privacy, not just
a physical trespass, was key to the decision.
Under the expectation of privacy standard, some cases are easy to decide. A person who walks down the street openly smoking a crack pipe is
exposing his illegal activity to the public, so a police officer’s observation
of the activity is not a search. A person who smokes crack at home, behind closed doors with the curtains drawn, has a legitimate expectation
of privacy and the police cannot peer through the keyhole or break in to
discover the criminal activity.
Beyond those easy cases, defining the expectation of privacy becomes
very confusing, and many of the Court’s decisions seem odd. For example, the interior of a house is protected from a police officer peeping
through a keyhole or scanning by a thermal imaging device to detect
high-intensity lamps used for growing marijuana, but the backyard
or a greenhouse is not protected from aerial photography that detects
marijuana plants, because the plants would be evident to anyone who
happened to be flying over. If someone abandons property, no expectation of privacy exists, and the concept extends to one’s garbage, even
if it has been “abandoned” by being left in opaque containers on the
sidewalk on garbage pickup day. So, according to the Supreme Court,
there is no expectation of privacy in credit card bills, love letters, or
other personal or revealing items left in the trash. (In an example of
broader protection under a state constitution than under the federal
Constitution, several state courts have held that people do have an expectation of privacy in their abandoned garbage, so the police need a
warrant before searching it.) Finally, obtaining a person’s bank records
from the bank or a record of telephone calls made from the phone company is not a search. Because the information is available to the bank
or phone company, there is no expectation that the information will be
kept private.
Even if a search has occurred, it does not mean that the police have
violated the Fourth Amendment. Notice that the amendment contains
two independent clauses. The first clause prohibits unreasonable searches,
and the second prescribes requirements that search warrants must meet,
notably the requirement that there be probable cause for the search.
What the amendment does not tell us is which of these clauses is primary.
For a long time the Court has considered the warrant requirement
to be primary. To obtain a search warrant, the police have to establish
probable cause that the search would turn up evidence of criminality, in
an orderly procedure before a neutral magistrate. Requiring a warrant
places a significant check on police activity and so provides considerable
Law 101
312
protection for personal liberty. Of course, sometimes it is impractical to
obtain a warrant because of the need to act quickly to find evidence that
otherwise would be removed or destroyed. Therefore, some searches can
be made without warrants, but only in narrowly defined circumstances
so that the search is not unreasonable.
The Court also has expressed a second approach to the amendment
that inverts the order of the requirements. In this view, the essential
command of the Fourth Amendment is that searches not be unreasonable. A search may be unreasonable for a number of reasons, only one of
which is that it was not conducted pursuant to a warrant. The warrant
clause states what is required to get a valid warrant, but it does not
render unreasonable searches conducted without a warrant. Instead, the
Court has to construct a general standard to evaluate the reasonableness
of warrantless searches.
It is tempting to regard the first theory as more consistent with an
approach to criminal procedure that focuses on the protection of rights
and the second theory as allied with one that focuses on letting the police
do their job. The primacy of the warrant requirement might be read to
severely limit the situations in which police will be able to search, while
reasonableness is a more flexible standard. But the case law has not
come out that way. Instead, the conflict of values that underlies criminal
procedure is expressed in each view. The exceptions to the warrant requirement have proliferated, and standards of reasonableness have not
been completely open-ended.
Begin with the warrant requirement. A warrant is an authorization
from a judge or comparable official to the police to search for and
seize evidence of a crime. Requiring a warrant separates the decision
of whether a search is appropriate from the person whose job it is to
do the search; presumably, an independent magistrate can more coolly
assess the evidence of alleged criminality and decide whether it meets
constitutional standards. But the warrant process as actually conducted
in many jurisdictions is paradoxical. The judge seldom takes more than
a few minutes to review the evidence in support of an application, most
warrant applications are granted, and the police can even request a
warrant by telephone, simply reciting the facts underlying their request.
Given this situation, can the warrant requirement act as an effective
check on police behavior? To some extent, it still does; the knowledge
that the request will have to be submitted to the judge disciplines police
and prosecutors to adhere more closely to legal standards.
The key task for the magistrate issuing the warrant is to determine
whether there is probable cause to believe that the search will find particular evidence of a crime at the place indicated. In this context “probable”
Criminal Procedure
313
does not mean it is more likely than not that a suspect is guilty or that
a search will turn up evidence of a crime, and how probable the cause
must be sets the balance between allowing police the discretion to fight
crime and protecting people’s privacy interests entailed in the Fourth
Amendment. For example, in two cases during the Warren Court era,
the Supreme Court held that in the common situation in which the police present information obtained from an informant as the basis for a
warrant, the magistrate must be provided with sufficient facts about the
reliability of the informant and the basis for the informant’s conclusions
so that the magistrate can make an informed judgment about whether
probable cause exists (Aguilar v.  Texas, 1964, and Spinelli v.  United
States, 1969). A Burger Court decision, Illinois v. Gates (1983), explicitly abandoned this test. If, looking at the “totality of the circumstances,”
the magistrate could arrive at a commonsense judgment that probable
cause existed, a warrant could be issued even if the magistrate could determine neither the credibility of the anonymous informant nor the basis
for the informant’s knowledge.
Even under the view that the warrant clause of the Fourth Amendment
is primary, some searches do not require a warrant. Under the view that
the reasonableness requirement of the Fourth Amendment is primary,
of course, searches can be conducted without warrants if they are reasonable; the key indicator of reasonableness is probable cause to believe that evidence of crime will be found. In general, we might say that
warrantless searches are valid when stopping to get a warrant would unduly frustrate the goal of controlling crime or when the privacy interests
protected by the Fourth Amendment are not seriously infringed by the
search. But that general proposition hides much controversy about how
far we should let the police go.
Consider the exception for the seizure of items that are discovered in
plain view. If a police officer has lawfully entered a house or stopped a
car, for example, and suddenly notices a pile of drugs on the floor, he
may seize the drugs even if he lacks a warrant and did not have probable
cause to suspect the drugs were there. It would frustrate the purposes
of law enforcement if an officer, while engaged in a permissible act, was
unable to seize the evidence of criminality that came to his attention.
But the exception creates two temptations for the police: to make stops,
obtain warrants, or conduct searches under a pretext, with the expectation of finding in plain view items that they suspect are present but for
which they do not have probable cause, and to testify falsely that items
were found in plain view when they were actually discovered by going
beyond the authorized search. The Supreme Court initially responded to
the first temptation by permitting the plain-view exception only when
Law 101
314
the discovery of the items was inadvertent. Ultimately, however, the
Court rejected that requirement; once the officer is lawfully conducting
any search, the Court stated, there is little more invasion of a protected
privacy interest by allowing him to seize items found in plain view in
the course of the search, and the court can evaluate the reasonableness
of the search by considering objective standards (whether the item was
in plain view) that do not depend on the officer’s intention. The second
temptation still exists, and some defense attorneys suggest that police
officers routinely testify falsely that the product of a search was discovered in plain view.
Another example of a search that may be conducted without a
warrant is a search incident to an arrest. When a police officer makes an
arrest, it is reasonable for the officer to search the suspect and the area
right around him for weapons and for evidence. Otherwise, the officer’s
safety might be endangered and the suspect may conceal or destroy evidence of her crime (Chimel v. California, 1969). If the officer finds the
suspect’s cell phone, he can seize it because it might be used as a weapon
or it might contain evidence that the suspect would like to destroy.
But the concerns for safety and preservation of evidence do not permit
the officer to access the information on the phone, scroll through text
messages or a contacts list, or examine the call log to find more evidence
of a crime (Riley v. California, 2014). Similarly, police reasonably can
require someone arrested for drunk driving to take a breathalyzer test
and require any arrestee to submit to a cheek swab for a DNA sample
because the public’s interest in safe driving and proper identification of
arrestees outweighs the minimal invasion of the arrestee’s person and
privacy, but they cannot require the greater personal invasion of a blood
test without a warrant.
The use of objective standards such as these for assessing reasonableness has become increasingly favored by the Court as providing a basis
for striking the balance between allowing the police to do their job and
protecting Fourth Amendment liberties. For example, if the police have
probable cause to believe a crime has occurred, they may stop the person
who committed the crime; this is a reasonable seizure of the person under
the Fourth Amendment. But suppose the crime is only a traffic offense
and the stop is a pretext for searching for evidence of drug dealing by
an African American driver in a high crime area. Then the threat of unreasonableness is real, but the Court has held that as long as probable
cause exists, even if the probable cause of a minor traffic violation is
established only on the testimony of the officer, the stop is reasonable.
And even if the initial stop is unreasonable and therefore unconstitutional, if the officer checks and finds an outstanding traffic warrant for
Criminal Procedure
315
the person, the officer may arrest and search the person and use any evidence he finds in a subsequent prosecution. As Justice Sotomayor noted
in dissent in Utah v.  Strieff (2016), this approach vastly expands the
power given to police, and “it is no secret that people of color are disproportionate victims of this kind of scrutiny.” The Justice Department
has found that African American drivers are three times more likely than
white drivers to be searched during traffic stops.
In one type of situation, police do not need either a warrant or probable cause to engage in search and seizure. This is the stop and frisk
situation, where an officer detains a person briefly to talk to the person,
usually about some suspicious activity, and pats down the person’s
clothing to make sure that the person has no weapons that might pose
an immediate threat to the officer. In Terry v. Ohio (1968) the Court
recognized that “a police officer may in appropriate circumstances in
an appropriate manner approach a person for purposes of investigating
possible criminal behavior,” and then may “conduct a carefully limited
search of the outer clothing of such persons in an attempt to discover
weapons which might be used to assault him.” Subsequently the Court
held that requiring a suspect to identify himself during a Terry stop
violates neither his Fourth Amendment right against unreasonable search
and seizure nor his Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination
(Hiibel v. Sixth Judicial District Court, 2004).
What are the appropriate circumstances that permit a stop? The key
here is letting the police do their job while avoiding the arbitrary exercise of discretion. There must be some factual basis for suspecting the
particular person stopped of criminal activity, but what constitutes an
objective basis is not clear, and the courts often give deference to the
officer’s judgment.
Finally, there are some encounters between police and individuals that
do not even rise to the level of a Terry stop, so no Fourth Amendment
concerns are implicated. The Court in Terry struck the balance “when
the officer, by means of physical force or show of authority, has in some
way restrained the liberty of a citizen.” In the Court’s view, therefore,
when police board a bus and ask to see each passenger’s ticket and identification and to search his or her luggage, or when the police chase a
youth who panicked and fled at seeing the arrival of a patrol car, no
seizures have occurred.
What Is the Privilege Against Self-Incrimination?
The Fifth Amendment to the Constitution provides in part that “No
person . . . shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against
Law 101
316
himself.” This privilege against self-incrimination is fundamental to our
criminal justice system. In our accusatorial system, the prosecution has
the burden of proving its case through its own efforts, not through
an inquisition of the accused. If a defendant was compelled to speak,
she would be faced with what has been called the “cruel trilemma of
self-accusation, perjury, or contempt”—being forced to choose among
confessing to a crime, lying and being punished for perjury, or keeping silent and being punished for contempt of court. This violates our notions
of fair play, the balance between the individual and the government, and
the dignity of the individual. The privilege also protects an individual’s
privacy and reflects a mistrust of the police practices that may be used
to extract confessions.
But there is a cost to the privilege. In many cases a confession, or information obtained from the defendant that will lead to other evidence,
is the only plausible means of proving the defendant’s guilt. In cases in
which there are no witnesses and little or no physical evidence, only intense questioning of a suspect will provide evidence of guilt. Excluding
the defendant’s testimony, therefore, means that some crimes will go
unpunished.
What does it mean for a person to be compelled to be a witness
against himself in a criminal proceeding? The privilege relates to testimonial evidence from a defendant, not to other types of evidence. As
long as proper procedures are followed, the prosecution can force a
defendant to appear in a lineup, give a voice or handwriting sample, or
even give a DNA sample that may be incriminating. The prosecution
also can compel the production of records that were prepared for other
purposes, such as business records in the course of a prosecution for
tax fraud.
Read literally, the language of the Fifth Amendment might only prevent the government from forcing a defendant to testify at his trial but
permit any other kind of government compulsion that produces evidence
against the defendant. But the Supreme Court always has read the privilege more broadly. It would undercut the policies behind the privilege
if the police could coerce a confession or the prosecutor could compel
grand jury testimony and then use the evidence at the trial.
Consider what happens when the prosecutor is using the grand jury
to gather evidence and calls one of the targets of the investigation as a
witness. The witness is given a subpoena that requires her to testify. If
she fails to appear or fails to answer questions put to her, she can be held
in contempt of court and sent to jail. If she testifies falsely, she can be
prosecuted for perjury. If she wants to avoid either of those consequences
and testifies truthfully, and her testimony is later used against her at her
Criminal Procedure
317
trial, she has, in effect, been compelled to testify against herself. The key
is the use of the compelled testimony, not the place where it is given.
The prosecutor can avoid the exercise of the privilege against selfincrimination, at the grand jury or elsewhere, only by guaranteeing that
the testimony will not be used in a subsequent criminal prosecution.
This is commonly done by granting immunity from prosecution on the
basis of the testimony. Immunity can be of two kinds. Use immunity
means that the prosecution cannot use the witness’s testimony or any
evidence derived from it in a subsequent trial. If the prosecutor has evidence against the witness that is not the product of the witness’s testimony, though, that evidence can be used. Transactional immunity means
that the prosecution may not subsequently prosecute the witness for any
crime that is discussed in the witness’s testimony, even if the prosecutor
independently discovers evidence of the witness’s guilt.
A more common and controversial issue is how the privilege against
self-incrimination applies outside of formal judicial proceedings, particularly to police interrogations. In many cases, the most important
questioning of the defendant does not take place in the courtroom or
the grand jury room but rather in the police station. The Supreme Court
has recognized that interrogating a suspect in the police station is sufficiently intimidating that it threatens to undermine the privilege against
self-incrimination.
In Miranda v. Arizona (1964), after examining police practices about
interrogating suspects, including the tricks and other psychological
devices it believed were commonly used, the Court concluded that “the
very fact of custodial interrogation exacts a heavy toll on individual liberty and trades on the weaknesses of individuals.” It is necessary to use
“adequate protective devices . . . to dispel the compulsion inherent in
custodial surroundings.” These protective devices must be used in every
case and include the now-famous Miranda warnings. First, before a suspect in custody can be questioned, he must be informed “that he has the
right to remain silent . . . that anything said can and will be used against
the individual in court . . . that he has the right to consult with a lawyer
and to have the lawyer with him during interrogation . . . [and] that
if he is indigent a lawyer will be appointed to represent him.” Second,
if the suspect “indicates in any manner, at any time prior to or during
the questioning, that he wishes to remain silent, the interrogation must
cease . . . [and if he] states that he wants an attorney, the interrogation
must cease until an attorney is present.”
Although the Court suggested that other procedures that would effectively protect a suspect’s rights could substitute for the Miranda
safeguards, no other procedures have been offered or approved, so
Law 101
318
Miranda remains the controlling authority for interrogation procedures
today. Interestingly, as police have adapted their procedures to include
these easily administered warnings, the incidence of confessions has not
declined. Nevertheless, the decision remains controversial because in
some cases, the failure of the police to adhere to its requirements leads
to the exclusion of confessions from evidence.
The privilege of self-incrimination under Miranda attaches when police conduct a custodial interrogation. Custody means that the suspect
has been deprived of his freedom of action in any significant way that
creates an intimidating situation, even if the suspect has not been formally arrested. Thus when IRS agents interview a suspect in his home
or office, he is not in custody, unless something about the situation is
particularly intimidating; asking questions in the living room is not inherently intimidating, but being questioned by four police officers in
one’s bedroom at 4:00 a.m. has elements of compulsion. When the police
ask a suspect to come to the police station and specifically tell him that
he is not under arrest, he is not in custody. If he unwisely confesses to a
crime in those circumstances, the privilege against self-incrimination is
not violated. But when they pick him up in a police car, take him to the
station, and do not tell him that he is free to go, he is subject to compulsion, even if he is not arrested.
The question of what constitutes an interrogation also can produce
difficult cases. Obviously, when officers question a suspect, that is interrogation. Further, the intent of Miranda is to prevent unconstitutional compulsion, so other kinds of words or conduct by the police
that they should know are likely to elicit an incriminating response also
should be considered to be interrogation. But extending the privilege
that far will exclude credible evidence. For example, sometimes police
may carry on a conversation in the presence of the accused, which has
the intent or effect of inducing the accused to confess. In Rhode Island
v. Innis (1980) the defendant was arrested for murder and robbery with
a shotgun. As the police were taking him to the station in their cruiser,
they talked about how important it was to find the gun, lest it be found
by a child from a nearby school for handicapped children who might be
injured by it. The defendant volunteered to show the police where the
gun was, and the Court ruled that the statement and the evidence could
be used against the defendant, since the police had not interrogated him.
On the other hand, in Brewer v.  Williams (1977), a case concerning
what constitutes an interrogation for purposes of the Sixth Amendment
right to counsel, Williams was arrested for murder. During a trip from
Davenport to Des Moines in a police car, an officer said that because the
weather was worsening, it would be difficult to find the victim’s body
Criminal Procedure
319
and give her a “Christian burial.” Williams then directed the police to the
body. Here the Court held that there was an interrogation because the
officer’s remarks were directed specifically at Williams, who was known
to be deeply religious.
Suspects can waive the privilege against self-incrimination and its associated right to counsel. Miranda itself states that the waiver must be voluntary, knowing, and intelligent and that a waiver cannot be presumed
from a suspect’s silence after receiving the warning or from a confession
itself. More recently, however the Court has held that the privilege can be
waived if not unambiguously invoked. In Berghuis v. Thompkins (2010),
for example, Thompkins was held not to have invoked the privilege by
failing to respond when read his rights and staying silent during three
hours of subsequent questioning; when he finally answered “yes” to an
officer’s question, “Do you pray to God for shooting that boy down?,”
the statement was admissible at trial. Here the Court held paradoxically
that being silent is not enough to invoke the right to silence.
What Happens if Police Violate a Defendant’s Rights?
The constitutional protections of the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Amendments are not self-executing. Although the Fourth Amendment prohibits
unreasonable searches and seizures, for example, it does not tell us what
happens if an unreasonable search occurs. Much of the controversy
about the Supreme Court’s decisions in this area have come on this
issue of the remedy for violations of constitutional rights. Beginning
in Weeks v. United States (1914), the Court has formulated the exclusionary rule, which states that evidence obtained by the government in
violation of the Constitution may not be used against the defendant
whose rights have been violated. If the police find incriminating evidence during the course of an illegal search or obtain a confession in
violation of Miranda, the evidence or confession may not be used to
convict the defendant.
There has been vociferous criticism of the exclusionary rule because
it appears to undermine the objectives of law enforcement. Does it
make sense, as Justice Cardozo wrote, that “the criminal is to go free
because the constable has blundered”? The exclusionary rule favors the
guilty, by putting in their hands the ability to exclude evidence of their
guilt through the assertion of constitutional rights. To the extent that it
prevents evidence of guilt from being admitted at trial, it subverts the
search for truth and the imposition of criminal punishment.
Several reasons lie behind the exclusionary rule. If the courts allow
the use of illegally obtained evidence, they are in effect approving the
Law 101
320
unconstitutional conduct of the police. As Justice Clark wrote in Mapp
v. Ohio (1961), acknowledging Cardozo’s epigram, “The criminal goes
free if he must, but it is the law that sets him free. Nothing can destroy
a government more quickly than its failure to observe its own law.” In
Mapp, which made the rule binding in all state prosecutions, the Court
also added the rationale of the rule’s deterrent effect, a rationale that
has been emphasized increasingly since then. The rule discourages police
from conducting illegal searches or illegally obtaining confessions because it would be fruitless to do so, since the evidence so obtained could
not be used to convict the defendant.
Since Mapp, much of the debate about the exclusionary rule has focused on its deterrent effect. Does the rule have a significant deterrent
effect, and does the deterrence of unconstitutional police behavior outweigh the cost to law enforcement? Supporters of the rule point out
that through deterrence, the rule that seems to favor the guilty actually
protects the innocent. The rule does much more than serve as a safeguard against unlawful police action in an individual case. It also serves
as a warning to all police officers and encourages police departments to
improve training and supervision; as a result, there are fewer invasions
of constitutional rights of all of us. The costs of this deterrence are not
too great.
Critics suggest, however, that the rule is largely unnecessary. Like the
Miranda warnings, the exclusion of illegally seized evidence may have
been a useful prophylactic in an era of abusive police practices, but today
a greater concern is the need to fight crime. Exclusion of evidence unduly rewards the criminal and sabotages law enforcement. To the extent
that illegal police practices occur, they can be dealt with by other means,
such as a tort remedy or civil rights actions against the police. Both the
innocent and the guilty would have their constitutional rights protected;
either could bring an action against the police and recover damages for
an illegal search.
But proponents of the rule question whether such a remedy would
be effective. For modest violations of constitutional rights, the victim
would have little incentive to sue; where the police conduct random
traffic stops and illegally search cars, for example, the inconvenience,
annoyance, and frustration at the practice might be great, but the
damages would seldom be worth going through a protracted lawsuit.
More serious violations that turned up evidence of criminality could
theoretically bring larger damages, but it would be hard to translate the
theory into reality. Officers often are immune from suit for their actions,
and juries are likely to be very unsympathetic to the convicted criminal
bringing a tort claim for damages against a police officer.
Criminal Procedure
321
This conflict over the exclusionary rule has played out in court decisions
as well. One development is the “fruit of the poisonous tree” doctrine,
originating in Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States (1920). Federal
agents unlawfully seized incriminating documents from the defendant.
After the court ordered that the documents be returned, the prosecutor
had the grand jury issue a subpoena to the defendant to produce the
same documents. The Supreme Court invalidated the subpoena because
it was the ultimate product of the illegal seizure. Justice Felix Frankfurter
subsequently coined the colorful “fruit of the poisonous tree” language
to indicate that the result of an illegal search could not be admitted into
evidence. The doctrine extends the exclusionary rule by discouraging the
police from making an illegal search in the expectation that it will produce leads to evidence that subsequently could be legally obtained. But
the Court has cut back the doctrine as well; where the link between the
fruit and the original illegal action is attenuated, where knowledge of the
fruit came from an independent source, or where it would have been the
subject of an inevitable discovery even without the illegal activity, it may
be admitted. For example, the Court has found the link between the fruit
and the illegal action to be too attenuated to exclude evidence where a
police officer unconstitutionally stops a person, fortuitously discovers an
outstanding traffic warrant against him, and then discovers drugs while
arresting him on the warrant (Utah v. Streiff, 2016).
A second development concerns the proceedings to which the exclusionary rule applies. Obviously, it bars use of illegally obtained evidence
as part of the prosecution’s case at trial. To obtain the maximum deterrent effect, the police should be denied all use of the evidence. But that
has not happened. Instead, the Court has balanced the incremental deterrent effect of the exclusion of illegal evidence in settings other than
the trial against the cost to truth-seeking and conviction of criminals.
Therefore, it has held, illegal evidence may be used as the basis of a
grand jury indictment, to impeach the defendant’s testimony at trial,
in a sentencing hearing, in a prisoner’s habeas corpus proceedings
challenging a conviction, and in a proceeding by the IRS to levy against
illegally obtained funds.
A third development, and the most important, is the good faith exception to the exclusionary rule. The rule is primarily intended to
deter unconstitutional police conduct, and, the Court has concluded, it
cannot have that effect where the police do not intentionally violate a
defendant’s constitutional rights. Where they conduct an illegal search
in a good faith belief that their acts are constitutionally permissible, the
criminal process should not be denied the benefits of using the evidence,
even though it was illegally obtained. Suppose when a police officer
Law 101
322
stops a driver for a traffic violation, the computer terminal in his patrol
car indicates that there is an arrest warrant outstanding for the driver.
The officer arrests the driver, searches him and the car, and discovers
drugs and a handgun. The warrant had actually been quashed but, due
to negligence in entering information into the computer system, that information did not appear on the computer terminal. The drugs and guns
are the products of an illegal search because the search was not incident
to a valid arrest warrant, but, the Court ruled, it was not excluded from
evidence because the officer acted in good faith in relying on the computer system.
The good faith exception makes significant inroads to the exclusionary rule. It gives police less incentive to exercise caution in cases in
which they obtain warrants, and it gives magistrates little incentive to
closely scrutinize the basis for the warrant; in either case, error is cured
by the police officer’s good faith in carrying out the warrant. In cases
involving warrantless searches, it has further eroded the rule; a good
faith exception encourages police to err on the side of invading constitutional rights because it permits the use of evidence obtained through
good faith invasions. The Court concluded that the benefit of the exclusionary rule in deterring improper police behavior was modest when
their error was in good faith and only negligent, not intentional; that
modest benefit would be outweighed by the cost of setting a criminal
free (Herring v. United States, 2009).
What Is Plea Bargaining?
Television programs portray the trial, with its battle between prosecution and defense, as the central feature of the criminal process. Actually,
95 to 98 percent of criminal cases are disposed of without a trial when
the defendant pleads guilty, often through a plea bargain. A plea bargain
is a deal: an agreement between the defendant (through her attorney)
and the prosecutor that the defendant will plead guilty in exchange for
the prosecutor’s reducing the seriousness of the charges against the defendant, dismissing some of the charges pending against the defendant,
refraining from bringing other charges, or helping the defendant obtain
a lenient sentence.
Suppose Sara is arrested in a drug bust in which she is found in
possession of ten bags of cocaine and an unregistered handgun.
Attempting to flee the site of the bust, she tussles with a police officer.
The prosecutor charges Sara with possession of drugs with intent to
distribute (because of the quantity involved), possession of an illegal
firearm, resisting arrest, felonious assault, and, because she threw one
Criminal Procedure
323
of the bags onto the street, littering. This is typical prosecutorial
behavior; the prosecutor incurs no greater burden in bringing every charge
imaginable, and it improves his leverage at the time of negotiating a plea
agreement. Given the likelihood of conviction, Sara’s attorney negotiates
a plea bargain. In exchange for her agreement to plead guilty, the prosecutor agrees to reduce the distribution charge to simple possession, dismiss the weapons, assault, and littering charges, and recommend to the
judge that she be diverted into a drug treatment program rather than be
sent to jail. In addition, although the prosecutor has evidence that Sara
has been involved in other drug transactions, he refrains from bringing
any charges in those matters.
From this simple hypothetical we can see why plea bargaining is such
an important part of the system. For the prosecutor, Sara’s case is routine, and he has too many such cases to be able to bring them all to
trial. Even if he could, the judges before whom he practices would be
unable to try them all; underfunded courts face a huge backlog of cases.
Moreover, even though Sara’s case looks airtight, no case is a sure thing.
So a plea bargain gives the prosecutor an efficient and certain disposition
of her case. Sara may also be willing to implicate her drug supplier in
exchange for a plea bargain, so the prosecutor can leverage the charge
against her into a conviction of an even worse criminal.
A plea bargain works to Sara’s advantage, too. The panoply of charges
brought by the prosecutor threatens her with a lengthy prison term if
she is convicted. No matter how good she thinks her chances are at trial
(and for many defendants, the chances are not very good), if she loses
she faces a heavy penalty. Depending on the charges and her criminal
history, a charge reduction might be particularly important to her; if
she is a prior offender, a third felony conviction might subject her to a
mandatory sentence under a “three strikes and you’re out” law, which
she can avoid by pleading guilty to a misdemeanor. If she cannot make
bail, she does not have to stay in jail for several months waiting for a
trial. And she dramatically reduces the hassle and aggravation of being
subject to the criminal process.
In some cases, usually involving white-collar crimes, the defendant
doesn’t even have to plead guilty to fulfill her part of the bargain. She
instead may enter a plea of no contest or nolo contendere, which is a
statement that she does not contest the charges against her but is not
technically an admission of guilt. This plea has the same effect as a guilty
plea in the defendant’s case; the court will treat it as a plea of guilty and
sentence accordingly. But there is an important difference in subsequent
proceedings. Unlike a guilty plea, nolo contendere cannot be used as an
admission against the defendant in civil litigation. When a company is
Law 101
324
prosecuted by the government for criminal antitrust violations, for example, it may agree to plead nolo contendere to prevent establishing
its liability in subsequent civil suits by businesses or consumers it has
injured.
Plea bargaining is usually seen to be a response to congested courts
and long delays in the criminal process; the prosecutors have a huge
caseload to move, the defendant doesn’t want to wait for a trial, and the
judges are happy to have the cases out of the system. But plea bargaining
has been a prominent feature of the criminal justice system for at least a
century, and it commonly occurs in small towns and rural areas as well
in crowded metropolitan trial courts.
There is something unseemly about plea bargaining being a central feature of our criminal justice system. Isn’t achieving justice
supposed to be different from haggling over the price of a used car?
The whole process breeds disrespect for the law, and it has very practical consequences. Critics point out that plea bargaining produces unjust results, results that are sometimes too lenient and sometimes too
severe. Victims of crime and crime control advocates complain that
plea bargaining lets criminals off too easily; defendants get a discount
on their punishment not because they show remorse and accept responsibility for their conduct but because they are doing the system a
favor. At the same time, plea bargaining places pressure on defendants
who are innocent or at least not deserving of conviction on the charges
against them to plead guilty. Doing so means a quicker exit out of the
system, lighter punishment because judges sentence more harshly those
defendants who insist on their right to trial, and avoidance of the risk
of doing worse at trial. And because it is a low visibility process, it
diminishes the ability of the courts to supervise the behavior of police
and prosecutors.
Plea bargaining has its defenders, too. They argue that most defendants
are guilty—if not guilty of all they have been charged with, then at
least guilty of something. Plea bargaining ensures that the guilty will
be punished, and it enables those who may know the most about the
case—the prosecutor and the defense attorney—to agree on an appropriate punishment, given all the variables involved. Particularly as mandatory sentencing schemes have become more common, plea bargaining
preserves a necessary element of discretion in fitting the punishment to
the crime. And just as a practical matter, the system would grind to a halt
if all cases went to trial.
Whatever the debate about plea bargaining, it is here to stay. The
Supreme Court has not only sanctioned the system of plea bargaining; it
has applauded it (in Santobello v. New York, 1971):
Criminal Procedure
325
The disposition of criminal charges by agreement between the
prosecutor and the accused, sometimes loosely called “plea
bargaining,” is an essential component of the administration of
justice. Properly administered, it is to be encouraged.
The Constitution regulates the practice of plea bargaining to a limited
extent. First, the Sixth Amendment guarantees the right to be represented
by an attorney. This right applies at the plea bargaining stage as well as
at trial. Unless the defendant waives the right, she must be allowed to
have her attorney bargain for her and must be provided an attorney if
she cannot afford to hire her own.
Second, the defendant cannot be coerced into pleading guilty but,
applying the kind of distinction only lawyers can love, she can be induced. Inducement, of course, is the key to plea bargaining, but the
question is when inducement turns into coercion. Basically, as long as
the defendant has a choice among alternatives, unpalatable though they
may be, she is not compelled to plead guilty. For example, when the prosecutor in a check forgery case threatens to prosecute under a habitual
criminal statute when a conviction would result in life imprisonment but
offers instead to recommend a sentence of five years in exchange for a
plea, the law sees the defendant as induced but not compelled.
Third, the defendant’s plea must be voluntary, knowing, and intelligent. This does not mean that the defendant must make a good choice,
but only that she be informed about the basis and consequences of her
choice, including the charges against her and the rights she is waiving.
Typically the intelligent and voluntary requirement is satisfied by the
judge and the defendant engaging in a scripted, formulaic, often surreal
colloquy, in which the judge inquires whether the defendant understands
what is going on and the defendant responds briefly and affirmatively.
Fourth, there must be some factual basis for the defendant’s plea but,
strangely, the defendant does not actually have to be guilty in order
for the court to accept her plea of guilty. In North Carolina v. Alford
(1970), Alford entered into a plea bargain whereby he would plead
guilty to second-degree murder to avoid a possible death penalty. At the
arraignment, however, he testified that he was not guilty and was simply
pleading guilty to escape the risk of capital punishment. Nevertheless,
because there was evidence that might have supported a conviction, it
was permissible to allow him to plead to a crime while denying his guilt.
Finally, a deal is a deal, at least in part. The prosecutor and defendant
each must abide by the deal they have struck. If the prosecutor has promised to recommend a certain sentence in exchange for the plea, he must
do so. Similarly, if the defendant has promised something in addition
Law 101
326
to the plea—such as testimony against a codefendant—she must keep
her side of the bargain, too. Unless the judge has taken part in the plea
negotiations, he is not obligated to abide by the understanding reached
or the prosecutor’s plea negotiations. In many cases, though, unless and
until the judge accepts the plea agreement, the defendant will be allowed
to withdraw her plea and go to trial.
Why Do We Have Juries?
A distinctive feature of the criminal process in common law countries
is the jury. Recall from the earlier survey of the criminal process that
there are two kinds of juries. The grand jury indicts, or brings charges
against, a defendant. The trial jury, or petit jury, decides the issue of guilt
at trial. (The grand jury is grand and the trial jury petit—French for
“small”—because of their sizes. Historically the grand jury had twentythree members and the trial jury had twelve.)
The jury has been the deciding body in criminal trials in English law
for 800 years and in American law since the founding. It assumed particular importance in colonial times when it functioned as a guardian of the
colonists’ liberties against the impositions of royal judges. The Supreme
Court described the jury’s historic functions in Duncan v.  Louisiana
(1968):
Those who wrote our constitutions knew from history and
experience that it was necessary to protect against unfounded
criminal charges brought to eliminate enemies and against judges
too responsive to the voice of higher authority. . . . Providing an
accused with the right to be tried by a jury of his peers gave him an
inestimable safeguard against the corrupt or overzealous prosecutor
and against the compliant, biased, or eccentric judge. . . . Beyond
this, the jury trial provisions in the Federal and State Constitutions
reflect a fundamental decision about the exercise of official power—
a reluctance to entrust plenary powers over the life and liberty of
the citizen to one judge or a group of judges. Fear of unchecked
power, so typical of our State and Federal Governments in other
respects, found expression in the criminal law in this insistence upon
community participation in the determination of guilt or innocence.
More recently, the jury has come under attack. The criticisms have come
in part because the jury has been fulfilling its historic functions, but
critics believe those functions no longer fit our modern world. Jurors
bring too much community sentiment into the courtroom. Under this
Criminal Procedure
327
view, the role of the jury is not to protect the defendant’s liberties but
simply to find the facts without error or prejudice, a task for which
they are less well equipped than a professional judge. These criticisms
expose an inherent conflict in the jury’s role. The jury is the ultimate
fact finder and, as such, should be neutral, detached, and objective. At
the same time, the jury is the conscience of the community in the courtroom and, in a democracy, a form of citizen participation in governance.
By bringing in the community’s perspective, the jury may do something
other than simply determine the facts and apply the law in a neutral way.
An extreme example of this conflict is found in the debate over jury
nullification. At trial, the judge instructs the jury on the relevant law,
and the jury determines the facts of the case and applies the law it has
been given to the facts. But because a jury’s decision to acquit is for all
practical purposes unreviewable, it can, if it chooses to do so, refuse to
apply the law and acquit a defendant or convict on lesser charges in spite
of the judge’s instructions. If the jury finds the law or its application to
the defendant to be unjust, too harsh, or out of line with the values of
the community, it can, in this way, nullify the law. As one court stated,
the jury can act as a “safety valve” for exceptional cases without being a
“wildcat or runaway institution” (United States v. Thomas, 1996).
For all of the criticisms of juries, the social science evidence suggests
that in most cases they do a good job, or at least as good a job as a judge
would do. In a large majority of cases, when judges are asked what verdict they would have arrived at, they come to the same conclusion as the
jury, and in the cases in which they differ, judges are probably less likely
to convict.
Some attributes of the jury system have remained constant, while
others have changed over time. Two stable features are its availability to
the defendant in all serious cases and its finality. At least where the possible punishment is more than six months’ imprisonment, the defendant
must be afforded the option of trial by jury. The source of the jury’s great
power is its finality. In a civil case, either party can appeal a verdict. In
a criminal case, a defendant can appeal a conviction because of an error
committed during the trial, but if the defendant is acquitted, the prosecution cannot appeal the decision. Two changing features of the jury
are its size and decision requirement. Historically juries were composed
of twelve persons and were required to reach a unanimous verdict. The
Supreme Court has held that neither of those attributes is constitutionally required. A state can have a criminal jury as small as six members,
at least in a noncapital case, and can permit juries to decide cases on less
than a unanimous verdict, but most states have retained the historic position of twelve-member juries and unanimous verdicts in criminal cases.
Law 101
328
Since the historic purposes of the jury are to inject an element of community participation in the criminal process and to forestall abuses by
providing an unbiased decision maker, the jury needs to be representative of the community at large and to be impartial. Juries are selected
through a process that begins with the construction of a large list of
potential jurors. Depending on the practice in the jurisdiction, the list
may be constructed from voter registration lists, telephone books, tax
rolls, or drivers’ license records. Forms are mailed out to people on the
list, either to establish eligibility for jury service (excluding, for example,
people who cannot speak English or those in essential occupations such
as physicians and firefighters) or to summon members of the list for service. As many potential jurors as may be needed are summoned for a day
or week, constituting the venire, or panel from which the jury eventually
will be selected.
Since not every jury can be representative, the test of representativeness is applied to the jury list as a whole. The Sixth Amendment
guarantees the right to a fair cross-section of potential jurors. No significant, distinctive group in the population of the district from which the
list is drawn may be systematically excluded from the list without a valid
justification. Under this requirement, rules that caused systematic underrepresentation of racial or ethnic minorities or women, for example,
have been invalidated.
Impartiality is more a characteristic of the particular jury than of
the whole jury list. Impartiality is a requirement of the criminal justice system as well as a right of the defendant, but the way impartiality
is sought often allows the prosecution and defense to try to achieve
what they each want: a partial jury, one that is likely to be predisposed
to favor their respective cases. Once a panel of prospective jurors is
chosen, voir dire is conducted. The jurors are questioned about their
knowledge of the parties, lawyers, or facts of the case and about any
background factors, experiences, or predispositions that may not render
them impartial. In some jurisdictions the judge questions the jurors on
voir dire; others allow the lawyers for each side to do the questioning,
under the supervision of the judge. Where the lawyers conduct the voir
dire, they use the opportunity to begin to persuade the jurors, through
artful questioning that builds trust while it foreshadows the case that
is to come. In the typical case, voir dire focuses on the facts of the individual case and can be accomplished quickly. In high-profile cases,
jury selection may take days or even weeks, as the attorneys probe the
nuances of the jurors’ beliefs. This has become especially true in large
cases in which the lawyers retain jury consultants, psychologists, or
other purported experts who analyze the pool, describe model jurors,
Criminal Procedure
329
suggest questions to ask, and evaluate jurors’ responses and even their
body language.
As a result of the voir dire, the prosecution and defense lawyers can
challenge jurors and exclude them from the jury. Some challenges are
for cause, where the lawyer can persuade the judge that there is a factual
basis for presuming that the potential juror may not be able to render
an impartial verdict (for example, because of pretrial publicity, the juror
has already concluded that the defendant is guilty). Each side also has
a number of peremptory challenges, which it can exercise to exclude a
juror without giving a reason. A prosecutor may not exercise a peremptory challenge for an impermissible reason, however, such as if a prosecutor in a case involving an African American defendant systematically
excluded all African Americans from the jury.
The voir dire process takes on a distinctive cast in cases in which the
death penalty can be imposed. The Supreme Court has held that a jury
from which all persons were excluded who had “conscientious scruples
against capital punishment” did not arise from a fair cross-section of
the community. Such a jury was too likely to be predisposed to convict
and sentence to death. But a jury can be death-qualified, or composed of
those willing to return a guilty verdict and a death penalty. If a juror’s
view on capital punishment would make it hard for him to impose the
death penalty, he may be excluded from the jury for cause. The result
is that death-qualified juries are more likely to convict and impose the
death penalty than truly representative juries, but, in the opinion of the
Supreme Court, not unconstitutionally so.
Because the jury is required to reach its verdict only on the evidence
presented in court, publicity about the case before or during the trial
presents a problem for the defendant’s right to a fair trial. The court can,
when necessary, impose a gag order on the lawyers, preventing them
from making public statements about the trial, but the media has a First
Amendment right to report the news, and, except in limited cases, the
court cannot close a trial to the public nor prohibit the media from reporting information about a crime or a trial. (The exceptions arise where
the state has a compelling interest in closing the proceedings or otherwise limiting the reporting, as in allowing minors who are victims of sex
crimes to testify in private or prohibiting the disclosure of jurors’ names
in high-visibility cases.) The courts have to balance the right to a fair
trial against the right to report proceedings.
In extreme cases, the balance can be struck by moving the trial outside
the venue where it would normally be tried. If many potential jurors in
an area have seen television reports that might prejudice their view of
the case, the trial can be moved to another county. Sometimes the change
Law 101
330
works in reverse, inconveniencing the jurors rather than the lawyers,
court personnel, and witnesses; instead of moving the trial to another
venue, a jury is brought in from another venue.
In less extreme cases, prejudicial publicity is dealt with during voir
dire of the jury and by prophylactic measures during trial. The key is
whether jurors are able to put aside what they have heard and consider only the evidence in court. The Supreme Court has held that even
if a juror has formed a belief about the guilt of the defendant, that
juror is not necessarily disqualified if he can put aside his previous
beliefs in deciding the case. When the trial begins the judge will admonish jurors who have been exposed to pretrial publicity to ignore
it in their deliberations. As with instructions from the judge in other
circumstances, this is based on the belief that jurors will listen to what
the judge says and will be able to suspend their preconceptions. The
judge will instruct the jury not to read or listen to news accounts of
the case or to do research online about its subject matter, and, in unusual situations, may order the jury sequestered, or housed in a hotel
under the supervision of court personnel with limited exposure to news
reports. A great hardship to jurors, sequestration is reserved for cases
with the greatest potential for prejudice.
What Is the Adversary Process?
Once the jury is impaneled, the trial begins. We speak of the trial as a
search for truth, but the law places restrictions on the search and assigns
everyone in the courtroom a different role in conducting the search. The
criminal trial, as a reflection of the entire system of criminal justice, is an
adversary process in which the adversaries have different objectives, and
the means they can employ to achieve those objectives are limited by the
rules of law and professional ethics.
Begin with the prosecutor. The prosecutor’s job, obviously, is to obtain
a conviction of the defendant. In concept, this is not a personal triumph
for the prosecutor. The prosecutor is an agent of the government, and,
by obtaining a conviction, the prosecutor serves the government’s interest: punishing the criminal and preventing future crime.
But because the prosecutor is an agent of the government, his task is
not limited to obtaining a conviction. The government’s job is to do justice, and that is the job of the prosecutor, too. Doing justice means that
the prosecutor should attempt to convict only those who actually are
guilty, not simply those against whom a conviction can be obtained. It
also means that the prosecutor is required to uphold the law, including
all of the laws that make it difficult to obtain a conviction.
Criminal Procedure
331
Of course, in the press of business and the heat of battle, prosecutors
sometimes focus on the first objective—obtaining a conviction—at the
expense of the second—doing justice. In part this is just human nature,
but it also reflects two features of the criminal process. First, prosecutors,
as repeat players in the system, just assume that most defendants are
in fact guilty. Second, the incentives of prosecutors favor achieving
convictions. District attorneys are elected in most jurisdictions, and it
is much easier to campaign on a platform of being tough on crime and
getting convictions than on being protective of defendants’ rights and
dismissing cases against the innocent. This imperative filters down to
prosecutors on the line, who are typically judged by conviction rates.
The defense attorney has a different role in the trial. The defense
attorney is the client’s advocate, putting the government to its proof,
requiring that the case against the defendant be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. (More about reasonable doubt shortly.) In doing so, the
defense attorney attacks the state’s evidence, questions the credibility of
its witnesses, and presents contrary evidence that tells a different story
or at least casts doubt on the government’s story. The defense attorney
also protects the rights of the defendant. The protections of the Bill of
Rights have meaning only because the defense attorney is there to enforce them. If the government is to convict the defendant, it must do so
according to law. The defense attorney’s role is so important that the Sixth
Amendment guarantees an accused “the Assistance of Counsel for his
defence.” The Supreme Court has given this guarantee teeth by requiring
a lawyer to be appointed to represent a defendant who cannot afford
one and by providing that “ineffective” assistance of counsel renders the
process constitutionally defective. If a defense attorney operates under a
conflict of interest, fails to conduct any pretrial discovery where doing
so would have revealed exculpatory evidence, doesn’t know the relevant
law, or otherwise is incompetent, the accused has been denied his right
to counsel in function if not in form.
People generally seem to understand what prosecutors do, but the
defense attorney’s role is more troubling. Most of the defendants in the
system undoubtedly are guilty. Therefore, to quote the title of James
Kunen’s book on his career as a public defender, “How can you defend
those people?” The answer is a cliché based in the conflict of values underlying criminal procedure, but, like most clichés, it is basically accurate. In the criminal justice system, the power of the state is brought to
bear against an individual. A basic principle of our government structure
is that great power is subject to abuse. That is why Congress ordinarily
can’t pass a law without the approval of the president and why elaborate procedural and substantive rights protect criminal defendants. The
Law 101
332
defense attorney’s role is to check the application of government power,
by ensuring that the defendant’s rights are protected. It would be convenient if we could only protect the rights of innocent people, but we
can’t, so we use an adversary process that empowers a defense attorney
to assert the rights of any defendant.
Does this kind of system produce abuses? No doubt. Advocates can be
overzealous, and all of the protections of defendants’ rights almost guarantee that some guilty defendants will go free. What we need to decide,
ultimately, is whether the abuses outweigh the advantages and whether
the system can be modified without being scrapped.
Consider two of the ways that the adversary system is limited in the
interest of protecting the defendant against abuse of power by the government. On television the trial often turns on a surprise witness or an
unexpected tactic by which a clever advocate defeats his opponent. In
real life, the opportunity for surprise is drastically limited by discovery
rules. The Supreme Court has held that the prosecutor has a constitutional duty to disclose material evidence to the defense, particularly evidence that tends to exculpate the defendant. Conversely, the defendant’s
privilege against self-incrimination prevents the court from requiring the
defendant to turn over incriminating evidence. And the imbalance of
power is such that it seems fair to require the prosecutor to disclose
more information; the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure and most
states require prosecutors to disclose potential evidence and other information beyond what is constitutionally required.
A second means of protection is the prosecutor’s burden of proving
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. A jury verdict of acquittal does not
mean that the defendant is innocent, and the defendant never has the
burden of proving his innocence. The burden is entirely on the prosecutor, and if the prosecutor fails to carry that burden, an acquittal is required. The defense attorney may choose as a matter of trial strategy to
try to convince the jury that the defendant is innocent, but it is equally
appropriate simply to cast sufficient doubt on the prosecutor’s story so
that the burden is not met.
Reasonable doubt is a much higher standard than the burden of proof
elsewhere in the law. In civil cases, the standard is preponderance of the
evidence, which only means that the conclusion is more likely than not.
Reasonable doubt is a doubt about guilt that remains after the jury has
weighed all of the evidence and seriously considered the matter. This
has long been the standard for conviction in criminal cases, and the
Supreme Court has held that it is a constitutionally required element of
due process. The criminal sanction should be reserved for cases in which
there is the utmost certainty that the defendant has committed a crime.
Criminal Procedure
333
Moreover, because of the imbalance in the criminal justice system in
which the weight of the government is arrayed against an individual, the
reasonable doubt standard provides further protection against government oppression.
How Does Sentencing Work?
When a defendant is convicted of or pleads guilty to a crime, sentencing
is the process through which his punishment is meted out. Of all the
steps from the definition of crimes through the stages of the criminal
process, sentencing is where the rubber meets the road; to a large extent, all of the other activity is directed at punishment of the guilty, and
sentencing is the step that determines the punishment.
The first step in sentencing is legislative. Judges are allowed to impose only sentences that have been authorized by statute. The legislature determines what types of punishments will be imposed in
what type of cases and the procedure by which they will be imposed.
Although the legislature’s ability to prescribe sentences is limited by
the Constitution, the Supreme Court has held that the limits are very
broad. It would violate the Eighth Amendment’s ban on the infliction
of “cruel and unusual punishments” to provide flogging as a punishment, for example, but the Court held that a sentence of life imprisonment without parole for possession of 672 grams (about a pound
and a half) of cocaine for an offender with no prior convictions
might be cruel but was not constitutionally unusual (Harmelin
v. Michigan, 1991).
The legislature has a great deal of latitude to determine the types of
sentences to be imposed. The most severe sanction, of course, is the
death penalty. Incarceration and probation are much more common.
The variations among crimes, criminals, and jurisdictions make it hard
to generalize, but about 70  percent of convicted felons are sentenced
to imprisonment and about 30 percent to probation. For less serious
crimes, the proportion receiving probation is much higher. For minor
offenses or first-time offenders, community service, youth boot camp,
home confinement, or other intermediate sanctions are common.
Criminals who receive probation actually often receive a jail sentence,
too, but execution of the sentence is suspended while they are on probation. While he is on probation, an offender usually must meet a set of
requirements, such as finding a job, reporting regularly to a probation
officer, and staying out of further trouble. If he violates the conditions
of probation, the probation may be revoked and the suspended sentence
takes effect, sending him to jail.
Law 101
334
Until recently, the typical procedure for sentencing a convicted offender required the judge to exercise discretion within a considerable
range prescribed by the legislature. For example, the statute might prescribe that robbery is punishable by a sentence of five to fifteen years
in prison. The judge would receive a presentence report from the probation office, relating important information about the offender, such
as criminal record, family and employment history, and psychological
profile. The victim of the crime or his family may make a victim impact
statement to tell the court about the effect the crime has had on them
and may provide more details about the crime than came out at trial.
Combining this information with the perceptions gained at the trial, the
judge would sentence within the permitted range, with the possibility of
suspending the sentence and putting the offender on probation.
The defendant might actually serve much less than the stated sentence, however—often a half to two-thirds less. Under an indeterminate
sentencing system, the parole authorities have considerable discretion
in deciding when, if at all, a prisoner is sufficiently rehabilitated to be
released before his sentence is completed. Most states also have “good
time” practices, under which prisoners can earn a reduction in their sentence, at the discretion of prison authorities, for serving “good time,” or
time in prison on good behavior, sometimes with participation in educational, work, or other rehabilitative programs.
The traditional model is still widely used, but, beginning in the late
1970s, there began a concerted effort to restructure the system to rein
in the judge’s discretion in sentencing. The effort arose from a perception that judges were exercising their discretion in such a way that there
was wide disparity among sentences, producing arbitrariness and unpredictability in the system. Two judges might sentence similar offenders
in different ways because one judge was more lenient than another or
emphasized different factors in sentencing. As doubts arose about the
system’s ability to rehabilitate offenders, moreover, confidence declined
in judges’ ability to determine appropriate sentences and in parole
boards’ ability to determine when a prisoner had been rehabilitated.
A variety of measures were enacted to limit discretion in sentencing.
The first measure is the use of sentencing guidelines. The objective
of sentencing guidelines is to take much of the discretion in sentencing
away from the trial judge and place it in the hands of the legislature
or a legislatively created sentencing commission. A  set of guidelines
prescribes how the trial judge must arrive at the sentence. Usually the
guidelines include a presumptive sentence, a sentence that is presumed
to be appropriate given the severity of the crime for which the defendant
has been convicted and characteristics of the defendant, notably his
Criminal Procedure
335
criminal history. For example, a robbery will have a designated base
level sentence that the judge is directed to reduce by a certain amount
if the particular defendant was a minor participant (if he only drove
the getaway car, for example) and increase by a certain amount if the
defendant has a prior criminal history of a specified type. Sometimes
the guidelines will simply prescribe an enhancement of a sentence when
particular facts are present, such as the crime’s being racially motivated.
Depending on the system, the trial judge may have limited discretion to
depart from the presumptive sentence, but if he does so, he must issue an
opinion explaining why, and the departure is subject to review on appeal.
Sentencing guidelines reduce the degree of variability in sentencing, but
many judges complain that they prevent judges from individually tailoring the punishment to fit the crime and the criminal.
The use of sentencing guidelines and judicial enhancement of sentences
was disrupted by a series of Supreme Court opinions beginning in 2000,
which held that under the Sixth Amendment’s right to a jury trial, facts
that are used to increase a defendant’s sentence must be submitted to the
jury and determined beyond a reasonable doubt, unless the defendant
admitted them. In Blakely v.  Washington (2004), for example, Ralph
Blakely pleaded guilty to second-degree kidnaping, which was ordinarily punishable by a sentence of forty-nine to fifty-three months. The
judge, acting under Washington’s guidelines, sentenced him to ninety
months because Blakely had acted with “deliberate cruelty.” Because
“deliberate cruelty” was not part of the statutory offense of seconddegree kidnaping, the Court held, his sentence could not be increased
unless a jury found that factor beyond a reasonable doubt. Washington’s
sentencing guidelines were, therefore, unconstitutional. Then in United
States v. Booker (2005) the Court held that it was unconstitutional for
the trial judge rather than the jury to determine a fact that required an
enhanced sentence under the federal sentencing guidelines and that the
guidelines would thereafter be advisory rather than mandatory. Some
jurisdictions now require that juries determine whether factors that will
affect the sentence are present, and others have followed the Court’s lead
in Booker by giving judges more discretion to depart from the guidelines,
an exercise of discretion that the Court has viewed favorably.
Another measure to limit discretion in sentencing—and to increase
punishment for certain types of crimes—is mandatory sentencing for
particular types of situations. Under these statutes, the judge has little or
no discretion in meting out a sentence. In Florida, for example, pulling
a gun during the commission of a crime carries a mandatory minimum
sentence of ten years. Weldon Angelos was sentenced to fifty-five years
in prison for selling $350 worth of marijuana to a police informant
Law 101
336
because he possessed a gun during the sale, even though he had not
used or even shown the gun. Federal law required the minimum sentence, which the sentencing judge denounced as “unjust, cruel, and irrational” and which could result, the judge noted, in Angelos being in
prison longer than another defendant he sentenced on the same day, a
lifelong criminal with sixteen convictions who most recently had broken
into the house of a young woman, held her at knifepoint, and forced her
to drive him away from the scene of his crimes (United States v. Angelos,
2004). Mandatory sentencing avoids the Sixth Amendment problem but
can violate the Eighth Amendment’s prohibition on cruel and unusual
punishment; a mandatory life sentence without the possibility of parole
for a juvenile defendant was struck down in Miller v. Alabama (2012).
A different type of mandatory sentencing is the “three strikes and
you’re out” law. Upon a defendant’s third conviction of a crime of
specified seriousness, the defendant must be sentenced to a long prison
term or, in some states, life imprisonment without the possibility of
parole.
The purpose of three strikes statutes is to deter criminals from repeating their crimes by raising the stakes for a second and third offense
and to make sure that the most serious criminals—repeat offenders—
are sentenced severely and prevented from committing future crimes.
As sometimes happens, three strikes laws have had unintended
consequences. Because the statutes often are sweeping in their definition,
some of the criminals sentenced under them are not the hardened threats
to society imagined by the drafters, as in a notorious California case in
which the defendant’s third offense was stealing a pizza. In addition,
the threat of being sentenced under such a law may affect the behavior
of offenders potentially subject to it, making them less willing to plea
bargain to a first or second felony and, if facing a third strike, more
willing to violently resist apprehension. Three strikes and other mandatory sentencing laws have also contributed to a vastly expanded prison
population. Public awareness of the draconian consequences of threestrikes laws has led some states to reduce their impact; California voters,
for example, passed a ballot proposition that restricted life sentences for
repeat offenders.
Finally, parole release has been severely restricted through “truth
in sentencing” statutes under which the sentence handed out by the
judge represents the time the defendant actually will serve. A few states
have abolished parole altogether, and many more have restricted it to
defendants convicted of nonviolent crimes. Most states also have limited
credit for good time by requiring that violent offenders serve at least
85 percent of their sentence before they can be paroled.
Criminal Procedure
337
What About the Death Penalty?
The death penalty may be the most hotly contested area of criminal procedure. All the other arguments about crime control, justice, fairness, and
rights coalesce in the debate about whether the state may put someone
to death. Some advocates of capital punishment cite the biblical injunction of “an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth” and see the possibility of
a death sentence as the ultimate deterrent for violent crime. Opponents
characterize capital punishment as an outdated barbarism, abolished in
every other Western nation and having little real effect on the incidence
of crime.
The debate about capital punishment is too complicated to do more
than capture its intensity in this brief survey of criminal procedure. In
a debate too often dominated by slogans, this section shows how complex the issue is. There are two issues, really: whether the death penalty
should be applied at all and, if so, how it can be applied fairly.
The argument about whether we should have a death penalty has two
strands. The first strand concerns the morality of the death penalty: Is it
morally justified, without regard to its social consequences? The second
strand addresses those consequences directly:  Does the death penalty
serve important social goals, especially the deterrence of crime?
Supporters of the death penalty argue that executing those who have
killed is just. It is just in that their crime deserves the most extreme punishment, and imposing deserved punishments is an accepted function of
the criminal law. Capital punishment is retribution rather than vengeance; the state weighs the criminal’s culpability and imposes the penalty
only on those most deserving of it.
Critics respond that there is no necessary connection between
executing criminals and doing justice. Certainly many of those sentenced
to death are culpable and dangerous, worthy of punishment and confinement, but most of them do not fit the model of a calculating killer
who deserves to be executed. Instead, most are the product of a horrific
upbringing, deprived of normal nurturing to an extent that they have become pathologically asocial. Moreover, it is not obvious that executions
are necessary for retribution; we do not cut off the hands of thieves or
castrate rapists, so why execute murderers?
Supporters also argue that the death penalty affirms the value society
places on human life, reserving its most severe sanction for those people
who have taken another life. Critics respond that capital punishment
cheapens our regard for life, brutalizes us, and inures us to killing. As
the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops wrote, “Increasing reliance on
the death penalty diminishes us and is a sign of growing disrespect for
Law 101
338
human life. . . . The death penalty offers the tragic illusion that we can
defend life by taking life.”
The moral argument is linked to the policy argument; probably few
people would argue for the death penalty, even if it is morally justified,
if it did not also do some good. Deterrence is an important function of
the criminal process, and the threat of capital punishment, supporters
contend, is the ultimate deterrent.
Critics respond that the death penalty is not much of a deterrent. Many
people who murder are under the influence of drugs or alcohol, psychologically disturbed, or in an emotional state so that they cannot stop and
coolly reflect on the consequences of their acts. Other murderers believe,
as most criminals do, that they will never be caught or, if they are, that
they will somehow escape the maximum punishment.
The deterrent effect of the death penalty is an empirical question,
but one that is hard to answer. Numerous studies have been conducted
comparing, for example, homicide rates in neighboring states with and
without the death penalty, or homicide rates in a state before and after
the death penalty is introduced. As one might expect on such a hotly
contested issue where clear data are difficult to gather, the studies report
varied results. Some scholars find no deterrent effect; others have argued
that each execution prevents as many as eighteen murders; still others
have concluded that executions have a brutalizing effect on the public
so that they actually increase the murder rate. At this point, we can only
conclude that there is no convincing evidence of a deterrent effect.
An issue that overlaps the moral and deterrent arguments concerns
whether the death penalty is applied fairly and consistently. Relatively
few criminals who commit murder are ever sentenced to death—about
one in a hundred—and even fewer of those ever are actually put to
death. The effectiveness of counsel, economic resources, and personal
characteristics all influence who will be sentenced to death and who will
die. Even more troubling are patterns of racial bias. In Louisiana, for example, a defendant convicted of killing a white person is fourteen times
more likely to be sentenced to death than one convicted of killing a black
person, and in Washington, juries are four times more likely to sentence
black defendants to death than white defendants in similar cases.
Advocates of capital punishment respond that inconsistency and discrimination are problems, but the real problem is that there are too few
executions, not too many. On the issue of racial bias, for example, the
problem is not that murderers of white people are executed at too high
a rate but that murderers of black people are not executed frequently
enough. The cure is to increase the application of the death penalty, not
to abolish it.
Criminal Procedure
339
Critics also question whether the death penalty can be applied without
error, which is an important issue because the death penalty is final.
Since 1976, when the Supreme Court reaffirmed the constitutionality of
the death penalty, about 1,500 people have been executed and over 150
individuals have been set free from death row after further investigation
revealed that they were wrongly convicted because of police or prosecutorial misconduct, ineffective lawyering, mistaken witness testimony,
or the lack of DNA evidence. That is, for every ten people who have
been executed, one person facing the death penalty has been exonerated.
Groups such as the American Bar Association have called for a moratorium on executions until procedures are in place to ensure that fair and
effective procedures are in place so that the innocent or the undeserving
are not sentenced to death.
Whether or not the application of the death penalty is wise public
policy, the Supreme Court has declared it to be constitutional, and
thirty states have a death penalty, although one state (Texas) accounts
for about a third of the recent executions and at least ten states with
the death penalty have not executed anyone in a decade or more.
The central constitutional issue is whether the death penalty violates
the Eighth Amendment’s prohibition on punishment that is cruel
and unusual. Applying this standard raises an interesting theme in
constitutional law. Capital punishment was practiced at the time
of the enactment of the Bill of Rights in 1791, so how can it violate a constitutional amendment drafted and ratified by people who
practiced it? The answer came in the Supreme Court’s first major
Eighth Amendment case, Weems v. United States (1910). The Court
invalidated a punishment of being shackled while at hard labor. “Time
works changes,” wrote Justice Joseph McKenna, “[and] brings into
existence new conditions and purposes. Therefore, a principle, to be
vital, must be capable of wider application than the mischief which
gave it birth.” As Chief Justice Earl Warren later expressed the principle, the prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment “must draw its
meaning from the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society.”
There is a second anomaly here. The death penalty is prescribed by the
legislature, the representative of the community. How can it then violate
contemporary standards of decency? The answer, of course, is that the
will of the majority (or, more realistically, the majority’s representatives)
is not conclusive as to community standards. Under our constitutional
system, the courts possess the power of judicial review of legislation
precisely to check the majority in cases where its actions exceed constitutional boundaries.
Law 101
340
The constitutionality of the death penalty came to the Supreme
Court in the 1960s, raised in a series of cases by a campaign of lawyers
spearheaded by attorneys associated with the NAACP Legal Defense
Fund. The decisive case was Furman v. Georgia (1972), which involved
three persons under death sentence and, indirectly, more than 600
prisoners on death row. In the longest set of opinions published in a
single case in the history of the Court, five justices invalidated the death
penalty as then applied and four dissented, with each of the nine writing
a separate opinion. Justices Brennan and Marshall held the death penalty to be inherently cruel and unusual, focusing on factors such as the
arbitrariness of application (as shown in the cases under review), the
cruelty, and the lack of deterrent effect of the death penalty. The three
other justices in the majority focused on the arbitrariness of application. The dissenters did not all disagree that the death penalty was in
some respects abhorrent, but they suggested that the Court should defer
to the legislature’s judgment about “evolving standards of decency.”
Subsequently in Gregg v. Georgia (1976) the Court in a set of similarly
fractured opinions held that the death penalty does not invariably violate the Constitution and established standards for reducing the arbitrariness of its application.
Because the focus in Furman and Gregg was on the arbitrariness of the
death penalty as applied, state legislatures rewrote their sentencing laws
to conform to the Court’s opinion. One proposed cure for arbitrariness
is to make a death sentence mandatory in all cases of specified types of
murder, such as all murders committed by prisoners under life sentence.
The Court, however, subsequently rejected mandatory sentences, in the
view that, because every person is a unique individual, particularized
consideration of individual factors relating to the crime and the defendant is constitutionally required. A  different cure for the problem
of arbitrariness is to guide the discretion of the decision maker, and the
Court has adopted this approach. Most states that have a death penalty
allow the jury to impose the sentence, and a first step in guiding the
jury’s discretion is to bifurcate the trial. At the first stage of the trial the
jury renders a verdict on the defendant’s guilt. If the defendant is found
guilty, additional evidence is presented at a second stage of the trial, at
the conclusion of which the jury decides whether a death sentence will
be imposed. Because the trial is bifurcated, the jury in the sentencing
phase can hear evidence of aggravating and mitigating factors relevant
to sentencing that would not be admissible during the guilt phase. This
is important, because the Court has held that the jury must be allowed
to consider all factors that mitigate the defendant’s guilt so that it is
free to decide that the death penalty is not appropriate. Typical factors
Criminal Procedure
341
to be considered include the particularly heinous nature of the crime
as an aggravating factor and that a young defendant was influenced by
someone else to commit the crime as a mitigating factor.
The Court has also narrowed the class of cases in which the death
penalty can be imposed at all. In some circumstances the penalty is disproportionate to the crime, so, for example, it may not be imposed as a
punishment where the defendant was only an accomplice to a crime or
where the defendant has been convicted of rape but not murder. In other
circumstances the situation of the defendant precludes execution; for example, the Court has held that to execute a mentally challenged person
or a person who was under eighteen years old at the time he committed
his crime would be cruel and unusual.
Why Does It Seem That Criminal Appeals Go on So Long?
In appeals, as elsewhere in the criminal process, we have to balance
conflicting purposes. Trial judges can make mistakes, and when those
mistakes prejudice a defendant’s rights, we want to make sure that
the mistakes are corrected. Otherwise, the rights guaranteed by the
Constitution may be subverted and an innocent person may go to jail.
But enough is enough. Finality is important, too. Just as we are unwilling
to invest unlimited resources into the investigative and trial processes
to make sure no mistakes are made, so, too, at some point, when a
defendant’s trial has been reviewed by an appellate court once, twice, or
more, we conclude that the defendant has gotten as much review as he
is entitled to.
Note that the discussion in this section is about appeal of a conviction
by the defendant. In civil cases, either party may appeal an adverse decision and in criminal cases, the defendant can always appeal a conviction
or an error in the conduct of the trial. The double jeopardy clause of the
Fifth Amendment prevents the government from repeatedly prosecuting
someone for a crime until, after a string of acquittals, it finally obtains a
conviction. Therefore, the prosecution cannot appeal an acquittal. The
clause’s scope is broader than that, though. Jeopardy attaches once the
jury is impaneled, so the prosecution cannot decide to stop a trial if it is
not going well and try again with a different jury. It also bars prosecution
for different statutory offenses arising out of the same set of facts, when
the proof required for one is the same as the proof required for another.
For example, if a driver is convicted of driving while intoxicated, she
cannot subsequently be prosecuted for negligent homicide for running
over a pedestrian during her drunken-driving spree, where the proof of
her negligence is her drunk driving. The state could bring both charges
Law 101
342
against her at the same time, but sequential prosecutions constitute
double jeopardy. However, the double jeopardy clause does not bar two
prosecutions by state and federal courts, when the crime is a violation
of the law of each authority. A bank robber may be prosecuted both
under state law for robbery and under federal law for bank robbery, a
federal crime. Nor does it bar a civil action that has some punitive effect
following a criminal conviction for related conduct. When an inmate
is about to be released from prison after serving time for sexual contact with a child, the state can institute proceedings to have him civilly
committed to a state institution under a sexually violent predator statute
without violating the double jeopardy clause.
There are two separate kinds of challenges that a defendant can make
to a conviction or an error by the trial court. An appeal is a request for
a direct review of a trial court error, directed to a court higher up in
the system than the trial court. A collateral challenge is an attack on a
trial court decision that is, as its name indicates, collateral, or out of the
normal chain of review; a collateral challenge usually comes after all
appeals have been exhausted. Most of the criticism of endless appeals by
defendants is actually criticism of collateral challenges.
First, let’s consider appeals. In every case, a defendant has a right
to appeal to a higher court to correct errors made by the trial court.
This makes sense; it would be grossly unfair if the trial judge improperly admitted evidence or erroneously instructed the jury on the law
and there was no way for the defendant to have the mistake corrected.
Beyond this first level of review, appeals are often discretionary with the
reviewing court. In a typical state system, for example, the defendant
has a right to appeal to the intermediate appellate court, but the state
supreme court has some discretion to decide whether or not it wants to
take the case. The U.S. Supreme Court exercises more discretion than
almost any other court; most defendants who want their cases heard by
the Court must petition for a writ of certiorari, asking the Court to decide to hear the case.
Suppose a convicted defendant could bring to the appellate court’s
attention any mistake that had been made below, and the appellate court
would reverse and order a new trial if it discovered a mistake. Since
no trial is ever perfect, a defendant always could have a second, third,
and fourth bite at the apple; no conviction could ever withstand review.
The courts have developed two doctrines to prevent this situation, one
dealing with what may be reviewed and the other dealing with how it is
reviewed.
The first doctrine states that an appellate court will only consider on
appeal an issue that the defendant raised at trial. The rationale is simple;
Criminal Procedure
343
it is unreasonable to go to the trouble and expense of a new trial that
could have been avoided if the defendant had raised the issue initially
and the trial court had an opportunity to correct its error. For example,
a defendant cannot claim on appeal that she was convicted using illegally obtained evidence unless her attorney had moved to exclude the
evidence from the trial.
In law, however, every rule has its exception. One exception to the
failure-to-raise rule is the plain error rule. The appellate court can correct
plain errors or “defects affecting substantial rights” that occurred at the
trial, even if the defendant did not raise the issue below.
The second doctrine states that not every error gives cause for reversal.
The rule, almost literally, is “no harm, no foul.” Under the harmless error
rule, only important errors justify reversing a conviction. When the error
complained of does not concern the defendant’s constitutional rights,
the question is how much the mistake contributed to the conviction. For
instance, when the judge admits inadmissible evidence on a point but
there is plenty of other evidence substantiating the point, the erroneous
admission is, in the scheme of things, harmless.
One might think that mistakes that implicate the defendant’s constitutional rights should always give rise to a reversal. How can the violation
of a constitutional right be harmless, either in its effect on the defendant
or in the prophylactic effect in preventing constitutional violations?
But the Supreme Court has distinguished constitutional errors that are
harmless from those that require automatic reversal. For example, if a
confession obtained in violation of the right to counsel is admitted into
evidence, only the harmless error standard applies, but if a defendant is
indicted by a grand jury from which members of his race are systematically excluded, any resulting conviction must be reversed even if there is
overwhelming evidence of his guilt.
The appeals process should be enough to correct most errors, but for
centuries there has been an alternative, collateral means of attacking a
conviction: the writ of habeas corpus. “Habeas corpus” in Latin means
“you have the body”—the initial words of the court order directed to a
government official holding someone prisoner, in effect saying “you have
the body of this person and you must bring him to court.” Habeas corpus,
known as the Great Writ, is an all-purpose proceeding for challenging
the legitimacy of one’s confinement. A convicted prisoner who is in custody (actual or constructive) can petition a federal court for habeas
corpus directed at the federal or state authority holding him, claiming
that the confinement is illegal because of a legal error in the proceeding
that led to confinement. (As discussed in Chapter 2, the Supreme Court
also held that habeas was available to challenge the legality of the
Law 101
344
detention of prisoners captured during the war in Afghanistan and held
as enemy combatants in military prisons in the United States and at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba [Hamdi v. Rumsfeld and Rasul v. Bush, 2004,
and Boumedienne v. Bush, 2008].)
Habeas corpus is a powerful remedy. It expresses some basic principles: An individual can be criminally punished only in accordance with
law and especially constitutional law, and that requirement is so important that a judicial remedy exists in addition to the ordinary right of
appeal. But once again there is a conflict. If a defendant can use habeas
to challenge a conviction, can she use it over and over, to challenge one
error after another, even errors that have not been considered on direct
appeal? The courts and legislatures have attempted to balance the rights
protected by habeas against the desire for finality and the practical concern of punishing criminals.
Since the 1970s, the balance has shifted in favor of limiting the habeas right. First, under current law a number of constitutional violations
may not be raised at all in habeas proceedings. In particular, Fourth
Amendment claims that a defendant was convicted on the basis of illegally seized evidence are precluded where the defendant had a “full
and fair opportunity” to litigate the claims in the state proceeding. If
the defendant had such an opportunity, the courts have said, whatever
deterrent effect the Fourth Amendment was designed to have on illegal
police conduct has already been felt, so there is no point in allowing the
defendant to litigate the claims again.
Second, before invoking habeas a defendant must exhaust other
remedies available. If the defendant’s rights have clearly been violated,
she must raise the issues first in the state court. The only exceptions to
this rule are when the defendant can show a reason for failing to raise
the claim and actual prejudice as a result, when there was a fundamental
miscarriage of justice, or when there is no effective opportunity to obtain redress in state court. Remarkably, though, even when the defendant
attempts to show that she actually is innocent of the charges of which
she was convicted, the court is unlikely to allow the habeas petition.
Third, the federal habeas corpus statute permits courts to refuse habeas petitions if the issues have been dealt with in previous petitions and
“the ends of justice will not be served” by further review. The statute
also authorizes courts to deny petitions for abuse of the writ; where a defendant has once sought habeas, the court will deny successive petitions,
even those that raise different grounds, unless the defendant can provide
an explanation for failing to raise the issue previously and can prove the
prejudice that will result.
Criminal Procedure
345
Fourth, whether the defendant was actually innocent of the charges
of which she was convicted is almost always irrelevant to the granting
of habeas corpus. Habeas will be denied if, viewing the evidence most
favorably toward conviction, any rational jury could have convicted beyond a reasonable doubt.

Conclusion
By reading this book, you have learned about the basic principles and
issues of American law. Judges, lawyers, and law students use these
concepts every day. Let’s see if you can use this knowledge to do what a
judge does when deciding a case, a lawyer does when solving a client’s
problem, or a law student does on a final exam.
Find a story in today’s news or an incident in everyday life that has
something to do with the law. That should be easy to do; as you now
know, legal issues are everywhere. Then do what judges, lawyers, and
law students do: Identify the issues involved, consider the arguments on
both sides, and come to a conclusion about how the issues should be
resolved.
Here are some questions for you to think about:
• What area or areas of law are relevant? Is there a constitutional
question involved or is it an issue of private law? Does it involve
procedure or substance?
• What rules and principles apply? What specific legal doctrines relate
to the problem? What general principles, theories, and policies apply?
• Is your problem like any of the cases discussed in the book? In what
respects are the facts similar or different? Do the similarities and
differences suggest how the case should be decided under the rules
and principles you have identified?
• What is really at stake? What economic, social, and political interests
are involved? Who would benefit and who would suffer if the matter
were resolved one way or another?
Conclusion
348
• What is the best argument you can make for resolving the issue
one way, using the rules, principles, authorities, and facts you have
identified? What is the best argument you can make for resolving the
issue a different way?
• What do you think would be a just result? Would it require a change
in existing law? What would be the consequences of such a change?
How did you do on your final exam? Were you able to use what you
have learned from this book? Did you see different sides of the question?
Did it seem as if there was not an easy answer? Were you better able to
articulate your sense of justice? If so, congratulations—and welcome to
the law.