1
EN
Council of the European Union General Conditions
General Secretariat June 2016 - EN
GENERAL CONDITIONS OF THE CONTRACT
The contract consists of a purchase order and these general conditions, including the Annex on
security measures. If there is any conflict between different provisions in the contract, the following
rules must be applied:
(a) the provisions set out in the purchase order take precedence over those set out in the general
conditions;
(b) the provisions set out in the general conditions take precedence over those set out in the
tender specifications;
(c) the provisions set out in the tender specifications take precedence over those set out in the
contractor's tender.
All documents issued by the contractor (end-user agreements, general terms and conditions, etc.),
with the exception of its tender, are held inapplicable, unless explicitly mentioned in the special
conditions of the contract. In all circumstances, in the event of contradiction between the contract
and documents issued by the contractor, the contract prevails, regardless of any provision to the
contrary in the contractor's documents.
1. DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of the contract, the following definitions (indicated in italics in the text)
apply:
'Back Office': the internal system(s) used by the parties to process electronic invoices;
'Confidential information or document': any information or document received by either
party from the other or accessed by either party in the context of the performance of the
contract, that any of the parties has identified in writing as confidential. It cannot include
information that is publicly available;
'Conflict of Interest': a situation where the impartial and objective performance of the
contract by the contractor is compromised for reasons involving family, emotional life,
political or national affinity, economic interest, or any other shared interest with the
contracting authority or any third party related to the subject-matter of the contract;
2
EN
'Creator': means any natural person who contributes to the production of the result;
'EDI message' (electronic data interchange): a message created and exchanged through the
electronic transfer, from computer to computer, of commercial and administrative data using
an agreed standard;
'e-PRIOR': the service-oriented communication platform that provides a series of web
services and allows the exchange of standardised electronic messages and documents
between the parties. This is done either through web services, with a machine-to-machine
connection between the parties' back office systems (EDI messages), or through a web
application (the supplier portal). The platform may be used to exchange electronic
documents (e-documents) such as electronic invoices between the parties. Technical
specifications (i.e. the interface control document), details on access and user manuals are
available on the following
website: http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/informatics/supplier_portal/documentation/documentation_
en.htm
'Force majeure': any unforeseeable, exceptional situation or event beyond the control of the
parties that prevents either of them from fulfilling any of their obligations under the contract.
The situation or event must not be attributable to error or negligence on the part of the
parties or on the part of the subcontractors and must prove to be inevitable despite their
exercising due diligence. Defaults of service, defects in equipment or material or delays in
making them available, labour disputes, strikes and financial difficulties may not be invoked
as force majeure, unless they stem directly from a relevant case of force majeure;
'Formal notification' (or 'formally notify'): form of communication between the parties
made in writing by post or email, which provides the sender with compelling evidence that
the message was delivered to the specified recipient;
'Fraud': any intentional act or omission affecting the Union's financial interests relating to
the use or presentation of false, incorrect or incomplete statements or documents or to nondisclosure of information in violation of a specific obligation;
'Interface Control Document': the guideline document which lays down the technical
specifications, message standards, security standards, checks of syntax and semantics, etc. to
facilitate machine-to-machine connection. This document is updated on a regular basis;
'Irregularity': any infringement of a provision of Union law resulting from an act or
omission by an economic operator, which has, or would have, the effect of prejudicing the
Union's budget;
'Notification' (or 'notify'): form of communication between the parties made in writing,
including by electronic means;
'Performance of the contract': the execution of tasks and delivery of the purchased
supplies/services by the contractor to the contracting authority;
'Personnel': persons employed directly or indirectly or contracted by the contractor to
perform the contract;
3
EN
'Pre-existing material': any material, document, technology or know-how which exists prior
to the contractor using it for the production of a result in the performance of the contract;
'Pre-existing right': any industrial and intellectual property right on pre-existing material; it
may be a right of ownership, a licence right and/or right of use belonging to the contractor, the
creator, the contracting authority or to any other third parties;
'Professional conflicting interest': a situation in which the contractor's previous or ongoing
professional activities affect its capacity to perform the contract to an appropriate quality
standard;
'Related person': any person who has the power to represent the contractor or to take
decisions on its behalf;
'Result': any intended outcome of the performance of the contract, whatever its form or
nature, which is delivered and finally or partially approved by the contracting authority. A
result may be further defined in the contract as a deliverable. A result may, in addition to
materials produced by the contractor or at its request, also include pre-existing materials;
'Substantial error': any infringement of a contract provision resulting from an act or
omission, which causes or might cause a loss to the Union's budget;
'Supplier portal': the e-PRIOR portal, which allows the contractor to exchange electronic
business documents, such as invoices, through a graphical user interface; its main features can
be found in the supplier portal overview document available on the following website:
http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/informatics/supplier_portal/doc/um_supplier_portal_overview.pdf
2. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES IN THE EVENT OF A JOINT TENDER
In the event of a joint tender submitted by a group of economic operators and where the
group does not have legal personality or legal capacity, one member of the group is appointed
as leader of the group.
3. SEVERABILITY
Each provision of the contract is severable and distinct from the others. If a provision is or
becomes illegal, invalid or unenforceable to any extent, it must be severed from the remainder
of the contract. This does not affect the legality, validity or enforceability of any other
provisions of the contract, which continue in full force and effect.
The illegal, invalid or unenforceable provision must be replaced by a legal, valid and
enforceable substitute provision which corresponds as closely as possible with the actual
intent of the parties under the illegal, invalid or unenforceable provision.
The replacement of such a provision must be made in accordance with Article 11. The
contract must be interpreted as if it had contained the substitute provision as from its entry
into force.
4
EN
4. PERFORMANCE OF THE CONTRACT (SUPPLIES AND SERVICES)
Delivery of supplies
4.1. The requested dates of delivery and the site to which the delivery is to be made are specified
in the purchase order. The contracting authority reserves the right to change the address
within a reasonable time before delivery.
The contracting authority must be notified of the exact date of delivery within the period
indicated in the purchase order. All deliveries must be made to the agreed place of delivery
during the hours indicated in the purchase order.
The contractor must bear all costs and risks involved in delivering the supplies to the place
of delivery.
4.2. Each delivery must be accompanied by a consignment note in duplicate, duly signed and
dated by the contractor or its carrier, stating the purchase order number and particulars of the
supplies delivered. One copy of the consignment note must be countersigned by the
contracting authority and returned to the contractor or to its carrier.
4.3. Signature of the consignment note by the contracting authority is simply an
acknowledgment of the fact that the delivery has taken place and in no way implies
conformity of the supplies with the purchase order.
Conformity of the supplies delivered must be evidenced by the signature of a certificate to
that effect by the contracting authority no later than one month after the date of delivery,
unless otherwise specified in the purchase order.
Conformity must be declared only where the conditions laid down in the purchase order are
satisfied and the supplies conform to the tender specifications.
If, for reasons attributable to the contractor, the contracting authority is unable to accept the
supplies, the contractor must be notified at the latest by the deadline for conformity.
4.4. The supplies delivered by the contractor to the contracting authority must be in conformity
with the purchase order in respect of quantity, quality, price and packaging.
The supplies delivered must:
(a) correspond to the description given in the contractor's tender and possess the
characteristics of the supplies provided by the contractor to the contracting authority as
a sample or model;
(b) be fit for any specific purpose required of them by the contracting authority and made
known to the contractor at the time of conclusion of the contract and accepted by the
contractor;
(c) be fit for the purposes for which supplies of the same type are normally used;
5
EN
(d) demonstrate the high quality standards and performance which are normal in supplies
of the same type and which the contracting authority can reasonably expect, given the
nature of the supplies and taking into account any public statements on the specific
characteristics of the supplies made by the contractor, the producer or its
representative, particularly in advertising or on labelling, in accordance with the state
of the art in the industry and the provisions of the contractor's tender;
(e) be packaged according to the usual method for supplies of the same type or, failing
this, in a way designed to preserve and protect them.
4.5. The contractor is liable to the contracting authority for any lack of conformity which exists
at the time the supplies are verified.
In the event of lack of conformity, without prejudice to Article 15 on liquidated damages
applicable to the total price of the supplies concerned, the contracting authority is entitled:
(a) either to have the supplies brought into conformity, free of charge, by repair or
replacement;
(b) or to have an appropriate reduction made in the price.
Any repair or replacement must be completed within a reasonable time and without any
significant inconvenience to the contracting authority, taking account of the nature of the
supplies and the purpose for which they are required by the contracting authority.
The term 'free of charge' in point (a) refers to the costs incurred to bring the supplies into
conformity, particularly the cost of postage, labour and materials.
4.6. If required by the purchase order, the contractor must assemble the supplies delivered within
a period of one month unless otherwise specified in the purchase order.
Any lack of conformity resulting from incorrect installation of the supplies must be deemed
to be equivalent to lack of conformity of the supplies if installation was provided for by the
purchase order and the supplies were installed by the contractor or under its responsibility.
This applies equally if the product was to be installed by the contracting authority and was
incorrectly installed owing to a shortcoming in the installation instructions.
4.7. The supplies must be packaged in strong boxes or crates or in any other way that ensures the
contents remain intact and prevents damage or deterioration. Packaging, pallets, etc.,
including contents, must not weigh more than 500 kg.
Unless otherwise specified in the purchase order, pallets must be considered as one-way
packaging and do not need to be returned. Each box must be clearly labelled with the
following information:
- name of contracting authority and address for delivery;
- name of contractor;
- description of contents;
- date of delivery;
6
EN
- number and date of purchase order.
4.8. The supplies must be guaranteed against all defects in manufacture or materials for two
years from the date of delivery, unless provision is made for a longer period in the tender
specifications.
The contractor must guarantee that any permits and licences required for manufacturing and
selling the supplies have been obtained.
The contractor must replace at its own expense, and within a reasonable time limit to be
determined by agreement between the parties, any items which become damaged or
defective in the course of normal use during the guarantee period.
The contractor is responsible for any conformity defect which exists at the time of delivery,
even if this defect does not appear until a later date.
The contractor is also responsible for any conformity defect which occurs after delivery and
is ascribable to non-compliance with its obligations, including failure to provide a guarantee
that, for a certain period, supplies used for the purposes for which they are normally used or
for a specific purpose will preserve their qualities or characteristics as specified.
If part of an item is replaced, the replacement part must be guaranteed under the same terms
and conditions for a further period of the same duration as that specified above.
If a defect is found to originate in a systematic flaw in design, the contractor must replace or
modify all identical parts incorporated in the other supplies that are part of the order, even
though they may not have been the cause of any incident. In this case, the guarantee period
must be extended as stated above.
Services
4.9. The contractor must provide services of a high quality standard, in accordance with the state
of the art in the industry and the provisions of the contract, in particular the tender
specifications and the terms of its tender.
4.10. The contractor must comply with the minimum requirements provided for in the tender
specifications. This includes compliance with applicable obligations under environmental,
social and labour law established by Union law, national law and collective agreements or
by the international environmental, social and labour law provisions listed in Annex X to
Directive 2014/24/EU1
.
4.11. If the contractor fails to provide the service in accordance with the contract ('unperformed
obligations') or if it fails to provide the service in accordance with the expected quality
levels specified in the tender specifications ('low-quality delivery'), the contracting authority
may reduce or recover payments proportionally to the seriousness of the unperformed
obligations or low-quality delivery. This includes in particular cases where the contracting
authority cannot approve a result, report or deliverable as defined in the purchase order after
the contractor has submitted the required additional information, correction or new version.
A reduction in price may be imposed, together with liquidated damages under the conditions
of Article 15.
 1 OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 65.
7
EN
4.12. The contracting authority must formally notify the contractor of its intention to reduce
payment and the corresponding calculated amount.
The contractor has 30 days following the date of receipt to submit observations. Failing that,
the decision becomes enforceable the day after the time limit for submitting observations has
elapsed.
If the contractor submits observations, the contracting authority, taking into account the
relevant observations, must notify the contractor:
(a) of the withdrawal of its intention to reduce payment; or
(b) of its final decision to reduce payment and the corresponding amount.
4.13. Any reduction in price does not affect the contractor's actual or potential liability or the
contracting authority's rights under Article 17.
4.14. The contractor has sole responsibility for complying with any legal obligations incumbent
on it, notably those resulting from tax and workplace safety legislation.
4.15. Contractors who are natural persons are required to provide proof of their status as a selfemployed person. For that purpose they must submit supporting documents concerning their
social security cover and value added tax (VAT) status.
4.16. The contractor has sole responsibility for taking the necessary steps to obtain any permit or
licence required for performance of the contract under Belgian laws and regulations.
4.17. All periods specified in the contract are calculated in calendar days, unless otherwise
specified.
4.18. The contractor must not present itself as a representative of the contracting authority and
must inform third parties that it is not part of the European public service.
4.19. The contract must be performed in such a way as to exclude the possibility of the contractor
or its personnel executing tasks under conditions identical to the working conditions of a
person employed by the contracting authority. The contractor or its personnel must not be
incorporated into the contracting authority's administrative organisation.
4.20. In the framework of its employment or service relationships with its personnel the contractor
must indicate that
- personnel executing the tasks assigned to the contractor may not receive orders
directly from the contracting authority;
- the contracting authority may not under any circumstances be considered to be the
personnel's employer and the said personnel must undertake not to invoke in respect
of the contracting authority any right arising from the contractual relationship
between the contracting authority and the contractor.
4.21. The contractor must ensure that the personnel performing the contract and any future
replacement personnel possess the professional qualifications and experience required to
provide the services, as the case may be on the basis of the selection criteria set out in the
tender specifications.
8
EN
4.22. At the contracting authority's reasoned request, the contractor must replace any member of
personnel who:
(a) does not have the expertise required to provide the services; or
(b) has caused disruption on the premises of the contracting authority.
The contractor bears the cost of replacing its personnel and is responsible for any delay in
providing the services resulting from the replacement of personnel.
4.23. The contractor must record and report to the contracting authority any problem that affects
its ability to provide the services. The report must describe the problem, state when it started
and what action the contractor is taking to resolve it.
5. COMMUNICATION BETWEEN THE PARTIES
5.1. Form and means of communication
Any communication of information, notices or documents under the purchase order must:
(a) be made in writing in paper or electronic format in the language of the purchase order;
(b) bear the purchase order number;
(c) be made using the relevant communication details set out in the purchase order; and
(d) be sent by post or email.
If a party requests written confirmation of an email within a reasonable time, the other party
must provide an original signed paper version of the communication as soon as possible.
The parties agree that any communication made by email has full legal effect and is
admissible as evidence in judicial proceedings.
5.2. Date of communications by post and email
Any communication is deemed to have been made when the receiving party receives it,
unless the purchase order refers to the date when the communication was sent.
9
EN
An email is deemed to have been received by the receiving party on the day of dispatch of
that email, provided that it is sent to the email address indicated in the purchase order. The
sending party must be able to prove the date of dispatch. In the event that the sending party
receives a non-delivery report, it must make every effort to ensure that the other party
actually receives the communication by email or post. In such a case, the sending party is
not held in breach of its obligation to send such communication within a specified deadline.
Post sent to the contracting authority is deemed to have been received by the contracting
authority on the date on which the department responsible referred to in the purchase order
registers it.
Formal notifications are considered to have been received by the receiving party on the date
of receipt indicated in the proof received by the sending party that the message has been
delivered to the specified recipient.
5.3. Submission of financial documents via e-PRIOR and validity of these documents
5.3.1. For communication of financial documents the parties agree that the contractor will either
use the supplier portal or take the necessary measures to use EDI.
5.3.2. The parties hereby agree that any financial document and related attachments exchanged
through the supplier portal or through a direct connection established between the contractor
and the contracting authority's back offices will have the same legal effects as paper invoices
and will be admissible as evidence in legal proceedings.
5.3.3. The contracting authority must take the necessary measures to implement and maintain
electronic systems that enable the supplier portal to be used effectively. The electronic
systems are specified in the Supplier Portal Overview2 and e-Invoicing User Manual3
.
5.3.4. Should a direct connection be established between the contractor and the contracting
authority's back offices to allow electronic transfer of financial documents, both parties must
take the measures necessary on their side to implement and maintain electronic systems that
enable EDI to be used effectively. The electronic systems are specified in the interface
control document4
.
5.3.5. If communication via the supplier portal or the EDI communication, as appropriate, is
hindered by factors beyond the control of one party, it must notify the other immediately and
the parties must take the necessary measures to restore this communication.
5.3.6. If it is impossible to have the supplier portal or the EDI communication restored within a
period of two working days, the contracting authority will notify the contractor that an
alternative messaging form will be used, i.e. paper messaging or email, until the supplier
portal or EDI communication, as appropriate, is restored.
 2 Please see
http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/informatics/supplier_portal/doc/um_supplier_portal_overview.pdf
3 Please see http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/informatics/supplier_portal/doc/um_sp_e-invoicing.pdf
4 The document is available for consultation at https://circabc.europa.eu/w/browse/5290b7b0-
8ca8-454b-87eb-0ac990362861
10
EN
5.3.7. If it is impossible for the contractor to have the communication restored within a period of
two working days, the contractor will notify the contracting authority that an alternative
messaging form will be used, i.e. paper messaging or email, until the supplier portal or EDI
communication, as appropriate, is restored.
5.3.8. The contractor must be notified of changes in the interface control document. When such a
change requires adaptations by the contractor, then the contractor will have a period of six
months to implement this change. This period can be shortened upon mutual agreement of
the parties. This period of six months does not apply to urgent measures required by the
security policy for the information systems of the contracting authority to ensure the
integrity, confidentiality and non-repudiation of information and the availability of ePRIOR.
5.4. Validity and acceptance of electronic invoices
5.4.1. The parties agree that an invoice, sent via the supplier portal, qualifies as an electronic
invoice.
5.4.2. Similarly, should a direct connection be established between the contractor and the
contracting authority's back offices to allow electronic transfer of financial documents, the
parties agree that a financial document, sent as mentioned in the interface control document,
qualifies as an EDI message.
5.4.3. Where a financial document is dispatched through the supplier portal, it is deemed to have
been legally issued or sent when the contractor is able to successfully submit the financial
document without any error messages. The PDF and XML documents generated in relation
to the financial document are to be considered as proof of receipt by the contracting
authority.
5.4.4. Where a financial document is dispatched using a direct connection established between the
contractor and the contracting authority's back offices, the financial document is deemed to
have been legally issued or sent when its status is 'received' as defined in the interface
control document.
5.5. Storage of electronic invoices and safety measures
5.5.1. When using the supplier portal, the contractor must, for each electronic invoice, download
the PDF and XML message as applicable within one year of submission, and store them
securely together with the related attachments, if any, in accordance with the time limits and
specifications prescribed by the applicable legislative requirements. After the end of the oneyear period copies of the financial documents will no longer be available for automatic
download from the system.
5.5.2. All EDI messages exchanged by the parties must be stored by each party, unaltered and
securely, in accordance with the time limits and specifications prescribed by the applicable
legislative requirements.
5.5.3. When using a direct connection for the electronic transfer of financial documents, the parties
must take the necessary measures to implement and maintain safety measures and
procedures in order to adequately prevent messages from incurring any delays, being
corrupted as to content or form, or being lost.
11
EN
5.5.4. In all cases the parties must strive to prevent third parties from obtaining unauthorised
access to messages.
5.5.5. If the use of safety measures and procedures leads to the rejection of or detection of one or
more errors in an EDI message, the receiver must inform the sender thereof as soon as
possible, but at the latest within two calendar days.
6. LIABILITY
6.1. The contracting authority is not liable for any damage or loss caused by the contractor,
including any damage or loss to third parties during or as a consequence of performance of
the contract.
6.2. If required by the relevant applicable legislation, the contractor must take out an insurance
policy against risks and damage or loss relating to the performance of the contract. It must
also take out supplementary insurance as reasonably required by standard practice in the
industry. Upon request, the contractor must provide the contracting authority with evidence
of insurance cover.
6.3. The contractor is liable for any loss or damage caused to the contracting authority during or
as a consequence of performance of the contract, including in the event of subcontracting,
but only to an amount not exceeding three times the total amount of the contract. However,
if the damage or loss is caused by the gross negligence or wilful misconduct of the
contractor or of its personnel or subcontractors, the contractor is liable for the whole amount
of the damage or loss.
6.4. If a third party brings any action against the contracting authority in connection with the
performance of the contract, including any action for alleged breach of intellectual property
rights, the contractor must assist the contracting authority in the legal proceedings, including
by intervening in support of the contracting authority upon request.
If the contracting authority's liability towards the third party is established and if such
liability is caused by the contractor during or as a consequence of the performance of the
contract, Article 6.3 applies.
6.5. If the contractor is composed of two or more economic operators (i.e. which submitted a
joint tender), they are all jointly and severally liable to the contracting authority for the
performance of the contract.
6.6. The contracting authority is not liable for any loss or damage caused to the contractor during
or as a consequence of performance of the contract, unless the loss or damage was caused
by wilful misconduct or gross negligence of the contracting authority.
7. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND PROFESSIONAL CONFLICTING INTERESTS
7.1. The contractor must take all the necessary measures to prevent any situation of conflict of
interest or professional conflicting interest.
7.2. The contractor must notify the contracting authority in writing as soon as possible of any
situation that could constitute a conflict of interest or a professional conflicting interest
12
EN
during the performance of the contract. The contractor must immediately take action to
rectify the situation.
The contracting authority may do any of the following:
(a) verify that the contractor's action is appropriate;
(b) require the contractor to take further action within a specified deadline.
7.3. The contractor must pass on all the relevant obligations in writing to:
(a) its personnel;
(b) any natural person with the power to represent it or take decisions on its behalf;
(c) third parties involved in the performance of the contract, including subcontractors.
The contractor must also ensure that the persons referred to above are not placed in a
situation which could give rise to conflicts of interest.
8. CONFIDENTIALITY
8.1. The contracting authority and the contractor must treat with confidentiality any information
or documents, in any format, disclosed in writing or orally, relating to the performance of
the contract and identified in writing as confidential.
8.2. Each party must:
(a) not use confidential information or documents for any purpose other than to perform
its obligations under the contract without the prior written agreement of the other
party;
(b) ensure the protection of such confidential information or documents with the same
level of protection as its own confidential information and in any case with due
diligence;
(c) not disclose, directly or indirectly, confidential information or documents to third
parties without the prior written agreement of the other party.
8.3. The confidentiality obligations set out in this Article are binding on the contracting authority
and the contractor during the performance of the contract and for as long as the information
or documents remain confidential unless:
(a) the disclosing party agrees to release the receiving party from the confidentiality
obligation earlier;
(b) the confidential information or documents become public through means other than a
breach of the confidentiality obligation;
(c) the applicable law requires the disclosure of the confidential information or
documents.
13
EN
8.4. The contractor must obtain from any natural person with the power to represent it or take
decisions on its behalf, as well as from third parties involved in the performance of the
contract, a commitment that they will comply with this Article. At the request of the
contracting authority, the contractor must provide documentary evidence of this
commitment.
9. PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA
9.1. Any personal data included in the contract must be processed in accordance with Regulation
(EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on
the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the
Community institutions and bodies and on the free movement of such data. Such data must
be processed by the data controller solely for the purposes of the performance, management
and monitoring of the contract. This does not affect its possible transmission to bodies
entrusted with monitoring or inspection tasks in application of Union law.
9.2. The contractor has the right to access its personal data and the right to rectify any such data.
The contractor should address any queries concerning the processing of its personal data to
the data controller.
9.3. The contractor has right of recourse at any time to the European Data Protection Supervisor.
9.4. If the contract requires the contractor to process any personal data, the contractor may act
only under the supervision of the data controller, in particular with regard to the purposes of
the processing, the categories of data that may be processed, the recipients of the data and
the means by which data subjects may exercise their rights.
9.5. The contractor must grant personnel access to the data to the extent strictly necessary for the
performance, management and monitoring of the contract.
9.6. The contractor must adopt appropriate technical and organisational security measures,
giving due regard to the risks inherent in the processing and to the nature of the personal
data concerned, in order to:
(a) prevent any unauthorised person from gaining access to computer systems
processing personal data, and especially:
(i) unauthorised reading, copying, alteration or removal of storage media;
(ii) unauthorised data inputting, as well as any unauthorised disclosure, alteration
or erasure of stored personal data;
(iii) unauthorised use of data processing systems by means of data transmission
facilities;
(b) ensure that authorised users of a data processing system can access only the personal
data to which their access right refers;
(c) record which personal data have been communicated, when and to whom;
(d) ensure that personal data being processed on behalf of third parties can be processed
only in the manner prescribed by the contracting authority;
14
EN
(e) ensure that, during communication of personal data and transport of storage media,
the data cannot be read, copied or erased without authorisation;
(f) design its organisational structure in such a way that it meets data protection
requirements.
9.7. Any request from a third party to the contract [be it a private person or any public
authority]for disclosure of personal data held by the contractor or to which the contractor
has access must be immediately communicated to the contracting authority.
9.8. An infringement by the contractor or its personnel of the provisions defined in this Article
constitutes a breach of contract entitling the contracting authority to terminate the contract
with immediate effect at the contractor's expense and will render the latter liable for
damages, with interest, for any resulting loss.
10. SUBCONTRACTING
10.1. The contractor must not subcontract and have the contract performed by third parties beyond
the third parties already mentioned in its tender without prior written authorisation from the
contracting authority.
10.2. Even if the contracting authority authorises subcontracting, the contractor remains bound by
its contractual obligations and is solely responsible for the performance of the contract.
10.3. The contractor must ensure that the subcontract does not affect the rights of the contracting
authority under the contract, particularly those under Articles 8, 13 and 21.
10.4. The contracting authority may request that the contractor replace a subcontractor found to be
in a situation provided for in points (d) and (e) of Article 17.1.
11. AMENDMENTS
11.1. Any amendment to the contract must be made in writing before all contractual obligations
have been fulfilled.
11.2. An amendment must not make changes to the contract that might alter the initial conditions
of the procurement procedure or result in unequal treatment of tenderers.
15
EN
12. ASSIGNMENT
12.1. The contractor must not assign the rights and obligations arising from the contract, including
claims for payments or factoring, without prior written authorisation from the contracting
authority. In such cases, the contractor must provide the contracting authority with the
identity of the intended assignee.
12.2. Any right or obligation assigned by the contractor without authorisation is not enforceable
against the contracting authority.
13. INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
13.1. Ownership of the rights in the results
The Union irrevocably acquires worldwide ownership of the results and of all intellectual
property rights under the contract. The intellectual property rights so acquired include any
rights, such as copyright and other intellectual or industrial property rights, to any of the
results and to all technological solutions and information created or produced by the
contractor or by its subcontractor in performance of the contract. The contracting authority
may exploit and use the acquired rights as stipulated in the contract. The Union acquires all
the rights from the moment the contracting authority approves the results delivered by the
contractor. Such delivery and approval are deemed to constitute an effective assignment of
rights from the contractor to the Union.
The payment of the price includes any fees payable to the contractor in relation to the
acquisition of ownership of rights by the Union including for all forms of exploitation and of
use of the results.
13.2. Licensing rights on pre-existing materials
The Union does not acquire ownership of pre-existing rights under the contract.
The contractor licenses the pre-existing rights on a royalty-free, non-exclusive and
irrevocable basis to the Union, which may use the pre-existing materials for all the modes of
exploitation set out in the contract. All pre-existing rights are licensed to the Union from the
moment the results are delivered and approved by the contracting authority.
The licensing of pre-existing rights to the Union under the contract covers all territories
worldwide and is valid for the duration of intellectual property rights protection.
The payment of the price as set out in the contract is deemed to also include any fees
payable to the contractor in relation to the licensing of pre-existing rights to the Union,
including for all forms of exploitation and of use of the results.
16
EN
Where performance of the contract requires that the contractor use pre-existing materials
belonging to the contracting authority, the contracting authority may request that the
contractor sign an adequate licence agreement. Such use by the contractor will not entail any
transfer of rights to the contractor and is limited to the needs of the contract.
13.3. Modes of exploitation
The Union acquires the rights to the results for the following modes of exploitation:
(a) reproduction: the right to authorise or prohibit direct or indirect, temporary or
permanent reproduction of the results by any means (mechanical, digital or other)
and in any form, in whole or in part;
(b) communication to the public: the exclusive right to authorise or prohibit any display,
performance or communication to the public, by wired or wireless means, including
the making available to the public of the results in such a way that members of the
public may access them from a place and at a time individually chosen by them; this
right also includes communication and broadcasting by cable or by satellite;
(c) distribution: the exclusive right to authorise or prohibit any form of distribution of
results or copies of the results to the public, by sale or otherwise;
(d) rental: the exclusive right to authorise or prohibit rental or lending of the results or
of copies of the results;
(e) adaptation: the exclusive right to authorise or prohibit any modification of the
results;
(f) translation: the exclusive right to authorise or prohibit any translation, adaptation,
arrangement or creation of derivative works based on the results, and any other
alteration of the results, subject to the respect of moral rights of authors, where
applicable;
(g) where the results are or include a database: the exclusive right to authorise or
prohibit the extraction of all or a substantial part of the contents of the database to
another medium by any means or in any form; and the exclusive right to authorise or
prohibit the reutilisation of all or a substantial part of the contents of the database by
the distribution of copies, by renting, by online or other forms of transmission;
(h) where the results are or include patentable subject-matter: the right to register them
as a patent and to further exploit such a patent to the fullest extent;
(i) where the results are or include logos or subject-matter which could be registered as
a trademark: the right to register that logo or subject-matter as a trademark and to
further exploit and use it;
(j) where the results are or include know-how: the right to use such know-how as is
necessary to make use of the results to the full extent provided for by the contract,
and the right to make it available to contractors or subcontractors acting on behalf of
the contracting authority, subject to their signing of adequate confidentiality
undertakings where necessary;
17
EN
(k) where the results are documents: the right to store and archive the results in line with
the document management rules applicable to the contracting authority, including
digitisation or converting the format for preservation or new use purposes;
(l) where the results are or incorporate software, including source code, object code and,
where relevant, documentation, preparatory materials and manuals, in addition to the
other rights mentioned in this Article:
(i) end-user rights, for all uses by the Union or by subcontractors which result
from the contract and from the intention of the parties;
(ii) the rights to decompile or disassemble the software;
(m) to the extent that the contractor may invoke moral rights, the right for the contracting
authority, except where otherwise provided in the contract, to publish the results with
or without mentioning the name(s) of the creator(s), and the right to decide when and
whether the results may be disclosed and published.
The contractor warrants that the exclusive rights and the modes of exploitation may be
exercised by the Union on all parts of the results, irrespective of whether they are created by
the contractor or consist of pre-existing materials.
Where pre-existing materials are inserted in the results, the contracting authority may accept
reasonable restrictions impacting on the above list, provided that the said materials are easily
identifiable and separable from the rest, that they do not correspond to substantial elements
of the results, and that, should the need arise, satisfactory replacement solutions exist, at no
additional cost to the contracting authority. In such a case, the contractor must inform the
contracting authority before making such a choice and the contracting authority has the right
to refuse it.
13.4. Identification of pre-existing rights
When delivering the results, the contractor must warrant that, for any use that the
contracting authority may envisage within the limits set in the contract, the results and the
pre-existing material incorporated in the results are free of claims from creators or from any
third parties and all the necessary pre-existing rights have been obtained or licensed.
To that effect, the contractor must establish a list of all pre-existing rights to the results of
the contract or parts thereof, including identification of the rights' owners. If there are no
pre-existing rights to the results, the contractor must provide a declaration to that effect. The
contractor must provide the contracting authority with this list or declaration, together with
the invoice for payment of the balance at the latest.
13.5. Evidence of granting of pre-existing rights
Upon request by the contracting authority, the contractor must provide evidence that it has
ownership of, or the right to use, all the listed pre-existing rights, except for the rights
owned or licensed by the Union. The contracting authority may request this evidence even
after the end of the contract.
18
EN
This evidence may refer, for example, to rights to: parts of other documents, images, graphs,
fonts, tables, data, software, technical inventions, know-how, IT development tools,
routines, subroutines or other programs ('background technology'), concepts, designs,
installations or pieces of art, data, source or background materials or any other parts of
external origin.
This evidence must include, as appropriate:
(a) the name and version number of a software product;
(b) the full identification of the work and its author, developer, creator, translator, data
entry person, graphic designer, publisher, editor, photographer, producer;
(c) a copy of the licence to use the product or of the agreement granting the relevant
rights to the contractor or a reference to this licence;
(d) a copy of the agreement or extract from the employment contract granting the
relevant rights to the contractor where parts of the results were created by its
personnel;
(e) the text of the disclaimer notice if any.
Provision of evidence does not release the contractor from its responsibilities if it is found
that it does not hold the necessary rights, regardless of when and by whom this fact is
revealed.
The contractor also warrants that it possesses the relevant rights or powers to execute the
transfer and that it has paid or has verified payment of all due fees including fees due to
collecting societies, related to the final results.
13.6. Quotation of works in the result
In the result, the contractor must clearly point out all quotations of existing works. The
complete reference should include, as appropriate, the following: name of the author, title of
the work, date and place of publication, date of creation, address of publication on the
internet, number, volume and other information that allows the origin to be easily identified.
13.7. Moral rights of creators
By delivering the results, the contractor warrants that the creators will not object to the
following on the basis of their moral rights under copyright:
(a) that their names be mentioned or not mentioned when the results are presented to the
public;
(b) that the results be divulged or not after they have been delivered in their final version
to the contracting authority;
(c) that the results be adapted, provided that this is done in a manner which is not
prejudicial to the creator's honour or reputation.
19
EN
If moral rights on parts of the results protected by copyright exist, the contractor must obtain
the consent of creators regarding the granting or waiver of the relevant moral rights in
accordance with the applicable legal provisions and be ready to provide documentary
evidence upon request.
13.8. Image rights and sound recordings
If natural persons appear in a result or their voice or any other private element is recorded in
a recognisable manner, the contractor must obtain a statement by these persons (or, in the
case of minors, by the persons exercising parental authority) giving their permission for the
described use of their image, voice or private element and, on request, submit a copy of the
permission to the contracting authority. The contractor must take the necessary measures to
obtain such consent in accordance with the applicable legal provisions.
13.9. Copyright notice for pre-existing rights
When the contractor retains pre-existing rights on parts of the results, reference must be
inserted to that effect when the result is used as set out in Article 13.3, with the following
disclaimer: '© — year — European Union. All rights reserved. Certain parts are licensed
under conditions to the EU', or with any other equivalent disclaimer as the contracting
authority may consider best appropriate, or as the parties may agree on a case-by-case basis.
This does not apply where inserting such reference would be impossible, notably for
practical reasons.
13.10. Visibility of Union funding and disclaimer
When making use of the results, the contractor must declare that they have been produced
under a contract with the Union and that the opinions expressed are those of the contractor
only and do not represent the contracting authority's official position. The contracting
authority may waive this obligation in writing or provide the text of the disclaimer.
14. FORCE MAJEURE
14.1. If a party is affected by force majeure, it must immediately notify the other party, stating the
nature of the circumstances, their likely duration and foreseeable effects.
14.2. A party is not liable for any delay or failure to perform its obligations under the contract if
that delay or failure is a result of force majeure. If the contractor is unable to fulfil its
contractual obligations owing to force majeure, it has the right to remuneration only for the
services actually provided.
14.3. The parties must take all necessary measures to limit any damage due to force majeure.
20
EN
15. LIQUIDATED DAMAGES
15.1. Delay in delivery
If the contractor fails to perform its contractual obligations within the applicable time limits
set out in the contract, the contracting authority may claim liquidated damages for each day
of delay using the following formula:
0.3 x (V/d) where V is the price of the relevant purchase or deliverable or result or, failing
that, the amount specified in the purchase order;
d is the duration specified for delivery of the relevant purchase or deliverable or result or,
failing that, the duration of performance of the contract specified in the purchase order,
expressed in days.
15.2. Procedure
The contracting authority must formally notify the contractor of its intention to apply
liquidated damages and the corresponding calculated amount.
The contractor has 30 days following the date of receipt to submit observations. Failing that,
the decision becomes enforceable the day after the time limit for submitting observations has
elapsed.
If the contractor submits observations, the contracting authority, taking into account the
relevant observations, must notify the contractor:
(a) of the withdrawal of its intention to apply liquidated damages; or
(b) of its final decision to apply liquidated damages and the corresponding amount.
15.3. Nature of liquidated damages
The parties expressly acknowledge and agree that any amount payable under this Article is
not a penalty and represents a reasonable estimate of fair compensation for the damage
incurred due to failure to provide the services within the applicable time limits set out in the
contract.
15.4. Claims and liability
Any claim for liquidated damages does not affect the contractor's actual or potential liability
or the contracting authority's rights under Article 17.
21
EN
16. SUSPENSION OF THE PERFORMANCE OF THE CONTRACT
16.1. Suspension by the contractor
If the contractor is affected by force majeure, it may suspend the performance of the
contract. The contractor must immediately notify the contracting authority of the suspension.
The notification must include a description of the force majeure and state when the
contractor expects to resume the performance of the contract.
The contractor must notify the contracting authority as soon as it is able to resume
performance of the contract, unless the contracting authority has already terminated the
contract.
16.2. Suspension by the contracting authority
The contracting authority may suspend the performance of the contract or any part of it:
(a) if the procedure for awarding the contract or the performance of the contract
proves to have been subject to substantial errors, irregularities or fraud;
(b) in order to verify whether the presumed substantial errors, irregularities or fraud
actually occurred.
The contracting authority must formally notify the contractor of the suspension. Suspension
takes effect on the date of formal notification, or at a later date if the formal notification so
provides.
The contracting authority must notify the contractor as soon as possible whether:
(a) it is lifting the suspension; or
(b) it intends to terminate the contract under point (f) or (j) of Article 17.1.
The contractor is not entitled to compensation for suspension of any part of the contract.
17. TERMINATION OF THE CONTRACT
17.1. Grounds for termination by the contracting authority
The contracting authority may terminate the contract in the following circumstances:
(a) if provision of the services under the contract has not actually started within 15 days
of the scheduled date and the contracting authority considers the new date proposed, if
any, unacceptable, taking into account Article 11.2;
(b) if the contractor is unable, through its own fault, to obtain any permit or licence
required for performance of the contract;
(c) if the contractor does not perform the contract in accordance with the tender
specifications or is in breach of another substantial contractual obligation;
22
EN
(d) if the contractor or any person that assumes unlimited liability for the debts of the
contractor is in one of the situations provided for in points (a) and (b) of Article 106(1)
of the Financial Regulation5
;
(e) if the contractor or any related person is subject to any of the situations provided for
in points (c) to (f) of Article 106(1) or to Article 106(2) of the Financial Regulation;
(f) if the procedure for awarding the contract or the performance of the contract proves to
have been subject to substantial errors, irregularities or fraud;
(g) if the contractor does not comply with applicable obligations under environmental,
social and labour law established by Union law, national law, collective agreements or
by the international environmental, social and labour law provisions listed in Annex X
to Directive 2014/24/EU;
(h) if the contractor is in a situation that could constitute a conflict of interest or a
professional conflicting interest as referred to in Article 7;
(i) if a change to the contractor's legal, financial, technical, organisational or ownership
situation is likely to substantially affect the performance of the contract or
substantially modify the conditions under which the contract was initially awarded;
(j) in the event of force majeure, where either resuming implementation is impossible or
the necessary ensuing amendments to the contract would mean that the tender
specifications are no longer fulfilled or result in unequal treatment of tenderers or
contractors.
17.2. Grounds for termination by the contractor
The contractor may terminate the contract if:
(a) it has evidence that the contracting authority has committed substantial errors,
irregularities or fraud in the procedure for awarding the contract or the performance
of the contract;
(b) the contracting authority fails to comply with its obligations, in particular the
obligation to provide the information needed for the contractor to perform the contract
as provided for in the tender specifications.
17.3. Procedure for termination
A party must formally notify the other party of its intention to terminate the contract and the
grounds for termination.
The other party has 30 days following the date of receipt to submit observations, including
the measures it has taken to continue fulfilling its contractual obligations. Failing that, the
decision to terminate becomes enforceable the day after the time limit for submitting
observations has elapsed.
 5 Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 on the financial rules applicable to the general
budget of the Union, as amended: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legalcontent/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:32012R0966
23
EN
If the other party submits observations, the party intending to terminate must formally notify
it either of the withdrawal of its intention to terminate or of its final decision to terminate.
In the cases referred to in points (a) to (d) and (g) to (i) of Article 17.1 and in Article 17.2,
the date on which the termination takes effect must be specified in the formal notification.
In the cases referred to in points (e), (f) and (j) of Article 17.1, the termination takes effect
on the day following the date on which the contractor receives notification of termination.
In addition, at the request of the contracting authority and regardless of the grounds for
termination, the contractor must provide all necessary assistance, including information,
documents and files, to allow the contracting authority to complete, continue or transfer the
services to a new contractor or internally, without interruption or adverse effect on the
quality or continuity of the services. The parties may agree to draw up a transition plan
detailing the contractor's assistance unless such plan is already detailed in other contractual
documents or in the tender specifications. The contractor must provide such assistance at no
additional cost, unless it can demonstrate that it requires substantial additional resources or
means, in which case it must provide an estimate of the costs involved and the parties will
negotiate an arrangement in good faith.
17.4. Effects of termination
The contractor is liable for damage incurred by the contracting authority as a result of the
termination of the contract, including the cost of appointing another contractor to provide or
complete the services, unless the damage was caused by the situation specified in point (j) of
Article 17.1 or in Article 17.2. The contracting authority may claim compensation for such
damage.
The contractor is not entitled to compensation for any loss resulting from the termination of
the contract, including loss of anticipated profits, unless the loss was caused by the situation
specified in Article 17.2.
The contractor must take all appropriate measures to minimise costs, prevent damage and
cancel or reduce its commitments.
Within 60 days of the date of termination, the contractor must submit any report, deliverable
or result and any invoice required for services that were provided before the date of
termination.
In the case of joint tenders, the contracting authority may terminate the contract with each
member of the group separately on the basis of points (d), (e) or (g) of Article 17.1, under
the conditions set out in Article 11.2.
18. INVOICES AND VALUE ADDED TAX
Invoices must contain the contractor's (or leader's in the case of a joint tender) identification
data, the amount, the currency and the date, as well as the contract reference.
Invoices must indicate the place of taxation of the contractor (or leader in the case of a joint
tender) for VAT purposes and must specify separately amounts not including VAT and
amounts including VAT.
24
EN
The contracting authority is exempt from all taxes and duties, including VAT, in accordance
with Articles 3 and 4 of the Protocol on the privileges and immunities of the European
Union.
The contractor (or leader in the case of a joint tender) must complete the necessary
formalities with the relevant authorities to ensure that the services required for performance
of the contract are exempt from taxes and duties, including VAT.
19. PAYMENTS
19.1. Time limit for payments
Payments must be made within 30 days of receipt of the invoice.
19.2. Date of payment
Payments are deemed to be effected on the date when they are debited to the contracting
authority's account.
19.3. Currency
Payments are made in euros or in the currency provided for in the purchase order.
19.4. Conversion
The contracting authority makes any conversion between the euro and another currency at
the daily euro exchange rate published in the Official Journal of the European Union or,
failing that, at the monthly accounting exchange rate, as established by the European
Commission and published on the website indicated below, applicable on the day when it
issues the payment order.
The contractor makes any conversion between the euro and another currency at the monthly
accounting exchange rate, established by the Commission and published on the website
indicated below, applicable on the date of the invoice.
http://ec.europa.eu/budget/contracts_grants/info_contracts/inforeuro/inforeuro_en.cfm
19.5. Costs of transfer
The costs of the transfer are borne as follows:
(a) the contracting authority bears the costs of dispatch charged by its bank;
(b) the contractor bears the costs of receipt charged by its bank;
(c) the party causing repetition of the transfer bears the costs for repeated transfer.
19.6. Payment of the balance
The contractor (or leader in the case of a joint tender) must send an invoice for payment of
the balance within 60 days of the end of the period of provision of the services, as provided
for in the purchase order or in the tender specifications.
25
EN
Payment of the invoice and approval of documents do not imply recognition of the
regularity, authenticity, completeness and correctness of the declarations and information
they contain.
Payment of the balance may take the form of recovery.
19.7. Suspension of the time allowed for payment
The contracting authority may suspend the payment periods specified in the purchase order
at any time by notifying the contractor (or leader in the case of a joint tender) that its invoice
cannot be processed. The reasons the contracting authority may cite for not being able to
process an invoice are:
(a) because it does not comply with the contract;
(b) because the contractor has not produced the appropriate documents or deliverables;
or
(c) because the contracting authority has observations on the documents or deliverables
submitted with the invoice.
The contracting authority must notify the contractor (or leader in the case of a joint tender)
as soon as possible of any such suspension, giving the reasons for it.
Suspension takes effect on the date the contracting authority sends the notification. The
remaining payment period resumes from the date on which the requested information or
revised documents are received or the necessary further verification, including on-the-spot
checks, is carried out. Where the suspension period exceeds two months, the contractor (or
leader in the case of a joint tender) may request that the contracting authority justify the
continued suspension.
Where the payment periods have been suspended following rejection of a document referred
to in the first paragraph of this Article and the new document produced is also rejected, the
contracting authority reserves the right to terminate the contract in accordance with point (c)
of Article 17.1.
19.8. Interest on late payment
On expiry of the payment periods specified in the purchase order, the contractor (or leader in
the case of a joint tender) is entitled to interest on late payment at the rate applied by the
European Central Bank for its main refinancing operations in euros (the reference rate), plus
eight points. The reference rate is the rate in force, as published in the C series of the
Official Journal of the European Union, on the first day of the month in which the payment
period ends.
Suspension of the payment period as provided for in Article 19.7 is not considered as giving
rise to late payment.
Interest on late payment covers the period running from the day following the due date for
payment up to and including the date of payment as defined in Article 19.2.
26
EN
However, when the calculated interest is EUR 200 or less, it must be paid to the contractor
(or leader in the case of a joint tender) only if it requests it within two months of receiving
late payment.
20. RECOVERY
20.1. If an amount is to be recovered under the terms of the contract, the contractor must repay the
contracting authority the amount in question.
20.2. Recovery procedure
Before recovery, the contracting authority must formally notify the contractor of its intention
to recover the amount it claims, specifying the amount due and the reasons for recovery and
inviting the contractor to make any observations within 30 days of receipt.
If no observations have been submitted or if, despite the observations submitted, the
contracting authority decides to pursue the recovery procedure, it must confirm recovery via
a debit note, which is sent to the contractor by formal notification and which specifies the
date of payment. The contractor must pay in accordance with the provisions specified in the
debit note.
If the contractor does not pay by the due date, the contracting authority may, after informing
the contractor in writing, recover the amounts due:
(a) by offsetting them against any amounts owed to the contractor by the Union or by
the European Atomic Energy Community;
(b) by calling in a financial guarantee if the contractor has submitted one to the
contracting authority;
(c) by taking legal action.
20.3. Interest on late payment
If the contractor does not honour the obligation to pay the amount due by the date set by the
contracting authority in the debit note, the amount due bears interest at the rate indicated in
Article 19.8. Interest on late payments will cover the period starting on the day after the due
date for payment and ending on the date when the contracting authority receives the full
amount owed.
Any partial payment is first entered against charges and interest on late payment and then
against the principal amount.
20.4. Recovery rules in the case of joint tender
If the contract is signed by a group (joint tender), the group is jointly and severally liable
under the conditions set out in Article 6 (liability). The contracting authority first claims the
full amount from the leader of the group.
27
EN
If the leader does not pay by the due date and if the amount cannot be offset in accordance
with point (a) of Article 20.2, the contracting authority may claim the full amount from any
other member of the group by notifying it of the debit note already sent to the leader under
Article 20.2.
21. CHECKS AND AUDITS
21.1. The contracting authority and the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) may check or require
an audit on the performance of the contract. This may be carried out either by OLAF's own
staff or by any other outside body authorised to do so on its behalf.
Such checks and audits may be initiated at any moment during performance of the contract
and up to five years starting from the payment of the balance.
The audit procedure is initiated on the date of receipt of the relevant letter sent by the
contracting authority. Audits are carried out on a confidential basis.
21.2. The contractor must keep all original documents stored on any appropriate medium,
including digitised originals if authorised under national law, for a period of five years
starting from the payment of the balance.
21.3. The contractor must grant the contracting authority's staff and outside personnel authorised
by the contracting authority the appropriate right of access to sites and premises where the
contract is performed and to all the information, including information in electronic format,
needed to conduct such checks and audits. The contractor must ensure that the information is
readily available at the moment of the check or audit and, if so requested, that information is
handed over in an appropriate format.
21.4. On the basis of the findings made during the audit, a provisional report is drawn up. The
contracting authority or its authorised representative must send it to the contractor, which
has 30 days following the date of receipt to submit observations. The contractor must
receive the final report within 60 days following the expiry of the deadline to submit
observations.
On the basis of the final audit findings, the contracting authority may recover all or part of
the payments made in accordance with Article 21 and may take any other measures which it
considers necessary.
21.5. In accordance with Council Regulation (Euratom, EC) No 2185/96 of 11 November 1996
concerning on-the-spot checks and inspections carried out by the Commission in order to
protect the European Communities' financial interests against fraud and other irregularities
and Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 11 September 2013 concerning investigations conducted by the European Anti-Fraud
Office, OLAF may carry out investigations, including on-the-spot checks and inspections, to
establish whether there has been fraud, corruption or any other illegal activity under the
contract affecting the financial interests of the Union. Findings arising from an investigation
may lead to criminal prosecution under national law.
28
EN
The investigations may be carried out at any moment during the provision of the services
and up to five years starting from the payment of the balance.
21.6. The Court of Auditors has the same rights as the contracting authority, particularly right of
access, for the purpose of checks and audits.
29
EN
ANNEX
SECURITY MEASURES
Section 1 – ACCESS TO SECRETARIAT PREMISES
A. Access passes
Anyone requiring access to the contracting authority's premises must first be accredited by the
Accreditation Service. Accreditation is the process of granting the appropriate access pass for
access to certain parts of the building once it has been ascertained that the person in question
is entitled to enter.
The competent official from the requesting department concerned within the contracting
authority will request access passes for personnel contracted by the contracting authority.
To this end, the contractor must:
(1) at least five working days before the scheduled start of the contract, send the designated
department of the contracting authority a list of the names and full identities of members of
the contractor's personnel who will work on the contracting authority's premises, together
with the registration numbers of the vehicles which must have access to the site in order to
perform the contract. Any communication relating to access to the contracting authority's
premises and access passes should be sent to the email address of the contact person
mentioned on the purchase order;
(2) notify the designated department of the contracting authority, at least three working
days in advance, of any projected changes to the team(s) working for the contracting
authority;
(3) notify the members of the contractor's personnel: that security staff of the contracting
authority are authorised to check the identity of any person wishing to gain entrance to the
premises of the contracting authority and, if need be, deny that person access; that the
contractor's personnel, and the vehicles which they use, may be subject to security checks on
entering or leaving the contracting authority's premises; and that security staff are entitled to
temporarily confiscate prohibited objects that pose a risk to security;
(4) take all necessary measures to protect people and property from any risks arising from
performance of the contract.
ANNEX
30
EN
Should the contractor's personnel need to enter secured areas they must have the prior
authorisation of the service in charge of the secured area concerned. Details are laid down in
Council Decision 2013/488/EU of 23 September 2013 on the security rules for protecting EU
classified information (OJ L 274, 15.10.2013, p.1).
Access passes are issued to the holder in person on production of:
(a) proof of identity, i.e. a document bearing a photograph, such as a national identity card
or passport. Other documents, such as a credit card or a driving licence, will not be accepted
as proof of identity;
(b) an extract from police records certifying good conduct (extrait de casier
judiciaire/uittreksel strafregister) obtained from the holder's local police station within the
previous two months.
Access passes are strictly personal and are the individual responsibility of their holder. Passes
may not be given to other members of the contract team or other third parties. Breaches may
lead to measures such as refusal of entry or withdrawal of certain access rights.
Access passes must be worn visibly at all times on the contracting authority's premises.
If an access pass is lost or stolen it must be reported to the Security Office immediately, and
in the case of a permanent pass also to the police. The holder must apply for a new access
pass. Upon recovery of a lost or stolen permanent access pass, it must be returned to the
Accreditation Service even if it has expired.
B. Vehicles
Contractors' vehicles may only use the entrance at Chaussée d'Etterbeek/Etterbeeksesteenweg
70 for the Justus Lipsius (JL) building, and Chaussée d'Etterbeek/Etterbeeksesteenweg 52 for
the Lex building.
Holders of a permanent pass may park their vehicles in the JL service car park provided that:
• the vehicle in question is registered with the Accreditation Service;
• the pass is programmed to allow automatic access to the service car park;
• the sticker issued by the Accreditation Service is placed on the inside of the vehicle's
windscreen, on the left-hand side.
All occupants of a vehicle, and not just the driver, must present their individual permanent
access passes to the security guard. Passengers without a permanent pass will be refused
access at the car park entrance and will be required to enter the building by a pedestrian
entrance, where they will have to undergo an electronic security check.
Drivers with ad hoc authorisation may park their vehicles on the access ramp to the loading
bay at JL but must put the cone issued at the guard's lodge on the roof of the vehicle.
Parking spaces are available on a 'first come, first served' basis.
ANNEX
31
EN
Additional security checks are carried out on all vehicles and passengers at the JL car park
entrance while summit arrangements are in place.
Belgium's highway code applies to driving on the internal access-ways of the site and in the
car park. Vehicles driving in the car parks must have their headlights on. Parked vehicles must
be locked and engines must be switched off.
Headroom in the car parks is generally limited to 2.05 m. Drivers wishing to enter the car park
with a higher vehicle must first consult the contracting authority's Accreditation Service.
Persons with reduced mobility may request a reserved parking space via the Health and Safety
Department (service.prevention@consilium.europa.eu). This option is also open to people
with temporarily reduced mobility.
Please inform the Health and Safety Department should you wish to park an LPG vehicle.
In the event of an accident, an accident report form ('incident report', available from the
Security Office) must be completed by the parties involved. Anyone whose vehicle causes
damage to the contracting authority's property will be held liable for repair costs. The Security
Office must be notified (tel. 7851 or 8909) and an accident report form completed for the
insurance companies. The contracting authority declines liability for any loss resulting in
particular from accidents, theft or damage, whatever the reason or cause, occurring in the car
park.
Subcontractors
Where the contractor has concluded subcontracting arrangements in accordance with the
contract, the provisions of this Annex will apply mutatis mutandis to the subcontractor(s) and
their personnel.
Section 2 – CCTV
For the safety and security of its staff, visitors, buildings, assets and information, and for
logistical reasons, the contracting authority operates a video protection system on parts of its
premises. Further details on the contracting authority's video systems are available in 'The
General Secretariat of the Council's Policy on Use of Video Systems', approved by the
Secretary-General on 16 June 2011, which is available on the Council website
at http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/general-secretariat/corporate-policies/pdf/video-en_pdf/
_______________________________