Since this is a book about statistics and not manufacturing, let’s go back
to the main point, which is that the “health” of U.S. manufacturing—
something seemingly easy to quantify—depends on how one chooses to
define health: output or employment? In this case (and many others), the
most complete story comes from including both figures, as the Economist
wisely chose to do in its graph.
Even when we agree on a single measure of success, say, student test
scores, there is plenty of statistical wiggle room. See if you can reconcile
the following hypothetical statements, both of which could be true:
Politician A (the challenger): “Our schools are getting worse! Sixty
percent of our schools had lower test scores this year than last year.”
Politician B (the incumbent): “Our schools are getting better! Eighty
percent of our students had higher test scores this year than last year.”
Here’s a hint: The schools do not all necessarily have the same number of
students. If you take another look at the seemingly contradictory statements,
what you’ll see is that one politician is using schools as his unit of analysis
(“Sixty percent of our schools . . .”), and the other is using students as the
unit of analysis (“Eighty percent of our students . . .”). The unit of analysis
is the entity being compared or described by the statistics—school
performance by one of them and student performance by the other. It’s
entirely possible for most of the students to be improving and most of the
schools to be getting worse—if the students showing improvement happen
to be in very big schools. To make this example more intuitive, let’s do the
same exercise by using American states:
Politician A (a populist): “Our economy is in the crapper! Thirty states
had falling incomes last year.”
Politician B (more of an elitist): “Our economy is showing appreciable
gains: Seventy percent of Americans had rising incomes last year.”
What I would infer from those statements is that the biggest states have
the healthiest economies: New York, California, Texas, Illinois, and so on.
The thirty states with falling average incomes are likely to be much smaller:
Vermont, North Dakota, Rhode Island, and so on. Given the disparity in the
size of the states, it’s entirely possible that the majority of states are doing
worse while the majority of Americans are doing better.